BLB - Berean Literal Bible
The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judah and his brothers.
And Judah begat Perez and Zerah out of Tamar, and Perez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram.
And Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon.
And Salmon begat Boaz out of Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed out of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse,
and Jesse begat David the king. Next: David begat Solomon, out of the wife of Uriah,
and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa.
And Asa begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah.
And Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah.
And Hezekiah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Amos, and Amos begat Josiah,
and Josiah begat Jechoniah and his brothers at the time of the carrying away to Babylon.
And after the carrying away to Babylon: Jechoniah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel,
and Zerubbabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor.
And Azor begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud.
And Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob,
And Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, the One being called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations, and from David until the carrying away to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ came about in this way: His mother Mary, having been pledged to Joseph, before their coming together, was found holding in womb through the Holy Spirit.
Then Joseph her husband, being righteous and not willing to shame her publicly, resolved to divorce her quietly.
But on his having pondered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, you should not be afraid to receive Mary as your wife, for that having been conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
And she will bring forth a son, and you shall call His name Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins.”
And all this has come to pass, so that it may be fulfilled that having been spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
“Behold, the virgin will hold in womb, and will bring forth a son, and they will call His name Immanuel” which is, being translated, “God with us.”
And Joseph, having been awoken from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him and received his wife.
But he did not know her until she had brought forth a Son, and he called His name Jesus.
Now Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, Magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
saying, “Where is the One having been born King of the Jews? For we saw His star in the east and have come to worship Him.”
And King Herod having heard this, was disturbed, and all Jerusalem with him.
And having assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he was inquiring of them where the Christ was to be born.
And they said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus has it been written through the prophet:
‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come forth One leading, who will shepherd My people Israel.’”
Then Herod, having called the Magi secretly, inquired of them the exact time of the star appearing.
And having sent them to Bethlehem, he said, “Having gone, search carefully for the Child; and when You shall have found Him, bring word back to me, so that I also having come, may worship Him.”
And having heard the king, they departed. And behold, the star they had seen in the east went before them until, having arrived, it stood over the place where the Child was.
And having seen the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
And having come into the house, they found the Child with His mother Mary, and having fallen down, they worshiped Him. And having opened their treasures, they offered to Him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
And having been divinely warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they withdrew into their own country by another route.
And of them having withdrawn, behold, an angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream saying, “Having arisen, take the Child and His mother, and flee into Egypt, and remain there until I should tell you, for Herod is about to seek the Child to destroy Him.”
And having arisen, he took the Child and His mother by night and withdrew into Egypt,
and there he remained until the death of Herod, so that it might be fulfilled what had been spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt I have called my Son.”
Then Herod, having seen that he had been outwitted by the Magi, was intensely enraged. And having sent forth, he put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its vicinity from two years old and under, according to the time he had ascertained from the Magi.
Then was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet Jeremiah, saying:
“A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children; and she would not be comforted, because they are not.”
But of Herod having died, behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
saying, “Having arisen, take the Child and His mother and go into the land of Israel; for those seeking the life of the Child have died.”
And having arisen, he took the Child and His mother and came into the land of Israel.
And having heard that Archelaus reigns over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And having been divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew into the district of Galilee.
And having come, he dwelt in a city being called Nazareth, so that it should be fulfilled that having been spoken through the prophets, that “He will be called a Nazarene.”
Now in those days John the Baptist comes, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
For this is the one having been spoken of through the prophet Isaiah, saying, “A voice of one crying in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord; make straight His paths.’”
And John himself had his garment of camel’s hair, and a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
At that time were going out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region around the Jordan,
and confessing their sins, were being baptized by him in the Jordan River.
But having seen many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “Brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance.
And do not presume to say within yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as father.’ For I say to you that out of these stones God is able to raise up children unto Abraham.
Already now the ax is applied to the root of the trees. Therefore every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but after me is coming He who is mightier than I, of whom I am not worthy to carry the sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire,
whose winnowing fork is in His hand, and He will clear His threshing floor and will gather His wheat into the barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
Then Jesus comes from Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be baptized by him.
But John was hindering Him, saying, “I have need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?”
But Jesus answering, said unto him, “Permit it presently; for thus it is fitting to us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he permits Him.
And immediately, having been baptized, Jesus went up from the water; and behold, the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and alighting upon Him.
And behold, a voice out of the heavens, saying, “This is my Son, the beloved, in whom I was well pleased.”
Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil.
And having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward He was hungry.
And the one tempting, having come to Him, said “If You are Son of God, speak, that these stones may become loaves of bread.”
But answering He said, “It has been written: ‘The man shall live not by bread alone, but by every word coming out of the mouth of God.’”
Then the devil takes Him to the holy city and sets Him upon the pinnacle of the temple,
and says to him, “If You are Son of God, throw Yourself down. For it has been written: ‘He will give orders to His angels concerning You, and will they bear You up in their hands, lest ever You strike Your foot against a stone.’”
Jesus said to him, “Again it has been written: ‘You shall not test the Lord your God.’”
Again the devil takes Him to a mountain exceedingly high and shows to Him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
And he says to Him, “All these things I will give to You, if falling down, You will worship me.”
Then Jesus says to him, “Get you away, Satan! For it has been written: ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and Him alone shall you serve.’”
Then the devil leaves Him, and behold, angels came and were ministering to Him.
And having heard that John had been arrested, He withdrew into Galilee.
And having left Nazareth, having come, he dwelt at Capernaum, on the sea-side in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
that it might be fulfilled that having been spoken through the prophet Isaiah, saying:
“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
the people sitting in darkness have seen a great light, and to those sitting in the land and shadow of death, a light has dawned on them.”
From that time Jesus began to proclaim and to say, “Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near!”
Now walking beside the Sea of Galilee, He saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and his brother Andrew, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
And He says to them, “Come follow after Me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
And immediately having left the nets, they followed Him.
And having gone on from there, He saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, in the boat with their father Zebedee, mending their nets. And He called them,
and immediately having left the boat and their father they followed Him.
And He was going throughout all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
And the news of Him went out into all Syria. And they brought to Him all the sick having various diseases and oppressing pains, and being possessed by demons, and having seizures, and paralytics—and He healed them.
And there followed Him great crowds from Galilee, and the Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the Jordan.
And having seen the crowds, He went up on the mountain. And He having sat down, His disciples came to Him,
and opening His mouth, He was teaching them, saying:
“Blessed are the poor in the spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
Blessed are those mourning, for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.
Blessed are those having been persecuted on account of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
Blessed are you when they shall insult you and shall persecute you, and lying shall say all kinds of evil against you on account of Me.
Rejoice and exult, because great is your reward in the heavens; for thus they persecuted the prophets before you.
You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt becomes tasteless, with what will it be salted. For nothing is it potent any longer except, having been cast out, to be trampled upon by men.
You are the light of the world. A city lying on a hill is unable to be hidden.
Nor do they light a lamp and put it under a basket, but upon the lampstand, and it gives light to all those in the house.
Thus let your light shine before men, so that they may see your good works and they should glorify your Father in the heavens.
Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the Prophets. I have not come to abolish, but to fulfill.
For truly I say to you, until heaven and earth shall pass away, not even one iota, nor one stroke of a letter, shall pass away from the law, until everything should happen.
Whoever then shall break one of the least of these commandments and shall teach others the same, he will be called least in the kingdom of the heavens; but whoever shall keep and shall teach them, he will be called great in the kingdom of the heavens.
For I say to you that unless your righteousness shall abound above that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall never enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
You have heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘You shall not murder’ and ‘Whoever shall murder will be liable to the judgment.’
But I say to you that everyone being angry with his brother will be liable to the judgment, and whoever shall say to his brother ‘Raca,’ will be liable to the Sanhedrin. But whoever shall say, ‘Fool!’ will be liable to the Gehenna of fire.
Therefore, if you shall offer your gift at the altar, and there shall remember that your brother has something against you,
leave your gift there before the altar and first go away, be reconciled to your brother; and then having come, offer your gift.
Be agreeing quickly with your accuser while you are on the way with him, lest ever the accuser deliver you to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you will be cast into prison.
Truly I say to you, you shall not come out from there until you should pay the last kodranten!
You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
But I say to you that everyone looking upon a woman in order to lust after her already has committed adultery with her in his heart.
And if your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and cast it from you. For it is better for you that one of your members should perish and not that your whole body should be cast into Gehenna.
And if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and cast it from you, for it is better for you that one of your members should perish and not that your whole body should depart into Gehenna.
It was also said, ‘Whoever shall divorce his wife, let him give her a letter of divorce.’
But I say to you that everyone divorcing his wife, except on account of sexual immorality, causes her to commit adultery. And whoever shall marry her who has been divorced commits adultery.
Again, you have heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘You shall not swear falsely, but you shall keep your oaths to the Lord.’
But I say to you not to swear at all: neither by heaven, because it is the throne of God;
nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of His feet; nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
Neither shall you swear by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black.
But let your statement ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ and ‘No,’ ‘No.’ Anything more than these comes from evil.
You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
But I tell you not to resist the evil person. Instead, whoever shall strike you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And to the one willing to sue you and to take your tunic, yield to him the cloak as well.
And whoever shall compel you to go one mile, go with him two.
Give to the one asking of you, and you shall not turn away from the one desiring to borrow from you.
You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
But I say to you, love your enemies and pray for those persecuting you,
so that you may be sons of your Father in the heavens. For He makes His sun rise on evil and good, and He sends rain on righteous and unrighteous.
For if you love those loving you, what reward do you have? Do not even the tax collectors do the same?
And if you greet only your brothers, what extraordinary are you doing? Do not even the Gentiles do the same?
You shall be perfect, therefore, as your Heavenly Father is perfect.
And beware not to do your righteousness before men in order to be seen by them. Otherwise you have no reward in the presence of your Father in the heavens.
Therefore when you perform acts of charity, do not sound a trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may have glory from men. Truly I say to you, they have their recompense.
But you, doing acts of charity, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward you.
And when you pray, you shall not be like the hypocrites, for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets so that they might be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their recompense.
But you when you pray, enter into your inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father, the One in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward you.
And praying, do not use vain repetitions like the pagans, for they think that in their many words they will be heard.
Therefore do not be like to them, for your Father knows of what things you have need before your asking Him.
Therefore pray you like this: ‘Our Father in the heavens, hallowed be Your name!
Your kingdom come. Your will be done as in heaven, so also upon earth.
Our daily bread, grant us today.
And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.’
For if you forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
And whenever you fast, do not be downcast in countenance like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces so that they might appear to men as fasting. Truly I say to you, they have their recompense.
But you fasting, anoint your head and wash your face,
so that you might not appear to men as fasting, but to your Father, the One in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward you.
Do not store up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroy, and where thieves do not break in nor steal.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
The eye is the lamp of the body. So if your eye is clear, your whole body will be full of light.
But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light within you is darkness, how great is that darkness!
No one is able to serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and he will love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and he will despise the other. You are not able to serve God and mammon.
Because of this I say to you, do not worry about your life, what you should eat or what you should drink; nor your body, what you should put on. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
Look at the birds of the air. They do not sow nor do they reap, nor do they gather into barns, and your Heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they?
And who of you by worrying is able to add one cubit to his stature?
And why do you worry about clothing? Consider carefully how the lilies of the field grow: They do not labor nor do they spin.
Yet I say to you that not even Solomon in all his glory was adorned like one of these.
But if God thus clothes the grass of the field, existing today and tomorrow being thrown into the furnace, will He not much more clothe you, O you of little faith?
Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ Or ‘What shall we drink?’ Or ‘What shall we wear?’
For the Gentiles seek after all these things. For your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of them all.
But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things will be added unto you.
Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Sufficient to the day is its own trouble.
Do not judge, lest you should be judged.
For with that verdict you pronounce, you will be judged; and with that measure you measure, it will be measured to you.
And why do you look at the splinter in your brother’s eye, but not notice the beam in your own eye?
Or how shall you say to your brother, ‘Permit that I might cast out the splinter from your eye,’ and behold, the beam is in your eye?
Hypocrite! First cast out the beam from your eye, and then you will see clearly to cast out the splinter from the eye of your brother.
Do not give that which is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the pigs, lest they shall trample upon them with their feet, and having turned, tear you to pieces.
Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and it will be opened unto you.
For everyone asking receives; and the one seeking finds; and to the one knocking, it will be opened.
Or which man is among you who, if his son will ask for bread, will give him a stone?
Or also, if he will ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
Therefore, if you, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in the heavens give good things to those asking Him!
All things therefore, as many as you might desire that men should do to you, so also you do to them, for this is the law and the prophets.
Enter through the narrow gate for wide is the gate and broad the way leading to destruction, and many are those entering through it.
For small is the gate and narrow the way leading to life, and few are those finding it.
Beware of the false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravenous wolves.
By their fruits you will recognize them. Are grapes gathered from thornbushes, or figs from thistles?
So every good tree bears good fruits, but the rotten tree bears bad fruits.
A good tree is not able to bear bad fruits, nor a bad tree to bear good fruits.
Every tree not bearing good fruit is cut down and is thrown into fire.
Then surely by their fruits you will recognize them.
Not everyone saying to Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of My Father in the heavens.
Many will say to Me in that the day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in Your name, and in Your name cast out demons and in your name perform many miracles?’
And then I will declare unto them, ‘I never knew you; depart you from Me, those working lawlessness.’
Therefore everyone who hears these words of Mine and does them will be like a wise man who built his house upon the rock.
And the rain came down, and the torrents came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it did not fall, for its foundation had been lain upon the rock.
And everyone hearing these words of Mine and not acting on them, he will be likened to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand.
And the rain came down, and the torrents came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it fell—and great was its collapse!”
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these words, the crowds were astonished at His teaching.
for He was teaching them as one having authority, and not as their scribes.
And He having come down from the mountain, great crowds followed Him.
And behold a leper having come, was worshipping Him, saying, “Lord, if You are willing, You are able to cleanse me.”
And having stretched out the hand, He touched him saying, “I am willing; be you cleansed!” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
And Jesus says to him, “See that you tell no one. But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”
And He having entered into Capernaum, a centurion came to Him, imploring Him,
and saying, “Lord, my servant is lying in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented.”
And He says to him, “I having come, will heal him.”
But the centurion answering, said, “Lord, I am not worthy that You should come under my roof; but just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
For I also am a man under authority, having soldiers under me. And I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
And Jesus having heard, marveled and said to those following, “Truly I say to you, no one in Israel with faith so great have I found.
And I say to you that many will come from east and west, and will recline with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of the heavens.
But the sons of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness; there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.”
And Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! As you have believed, be it to you.” And his servant was healed in that very hour.
And Jesus having come to the house of Peter, He saw his mother-in-law lying sick and fevering.
And He touched her hand and the fever left her; and she arose and was ministering unto them.
And evening having come, they brought to Him many being possessed with demons, and He cast out the spirits with a word and He healed all those being sick,
so that it might be fulfilled that having been spoken through the prophet Isaiah, saying, “He Himself took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.”
And Jesus, having seen a great crowd around Him, gave orders to depart to the other side.
And one scribe, having approached Him, said “Teacher, I will follow You wherever that You should go.”
And Jesus says to him, “Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere He might lay the head.”
And another of His disciples said to Him, “Lord, allow me first to go and to bury my father.”
But Jesus said to him, “Follow Me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.”
And He having entered into the boat, His disciples followed Him.
And behold, a great storm arose in the sea so that the boat was being swamped by the waves; but He Himself was sleeping.
And having approached, they awoke Him, saying, “Lord, save us, we are perishing!”
And He says to them, “O you of little faith, Why are you afraid?” Then having arisen, He rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.
And the men marveled, saying, “What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey Him?”
And He having come to the other side, to the region of the Gadarenes, two being possessed by demons met Him, coming forth out of the tombs, extremely violent, so that no one was able to pass by that way.
And behold, they cried out saying, “What to us and to you Son of God? Have You come here to torment us before the time?”
Now there was far off from them a herd of many pigs feeding.
And the demons were begging Him, saying, “If You cast us out, send us away into the herd of pigs.”
And He said to them, “Go!” And having gone out, they went away into the pigs, and behold, all the herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and perished in the waters.
And those feeding them fled, and having gone away into the city, they related everything, including the matter of those being possessed by demons.
And behold, all the city went out to meet Jesus. And having seen Him, they begged Him that He would depart from their region.
And having entered into a boat, He passed over and came to the own city.
And behold, they were bringing to Him a paralytic lying on a bed. And Jesus, having seen their faith, said to the paralytic, “Take courage, son; your sins have been forgiven.”
And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This one blasphemes!”
And Jesus, having known their thoughts, said, “Why do you think evil in your hearts?
For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk?’
But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins...” Then He says to the paralytic, “Having arisen, take up your mat and go to your house.”
And having arisen, he went away to his house.
And the crowds having seen, marveled and glorified God, the One having given such authority to men.
And Jesus passing on from there saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth. And He says to him, “Follow Me.” And having arisen, he followed Him.
And it came to pass, of Him reclining in the house, that behold, many tax collectors and sinners having come, were reclining with Jesus and His disciples.
And having seen it, the Pharisees said to His disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat with the tax collectors and sinners?”
And having heard, He said, “Not those being strong have need of a physician, but those being sick.
But having gone, learn what is, ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.”
Then the disciples of John come to Him saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees often fast, but Your disciples do not fast?”
And Jesus said to them, “Can the sons of the bridechamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the bridegroom shall have been taken away from them, and then they will fast.
But no one puts a patch of unshrunk cloth on old clothing, for the filling up of it tears away from the garment, and a worse tear emerges.
Nor do they pour new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise the wineskins are burst, and the wine is poured out, and the wineskins are destroyed. But they pour new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
Of Him speaking these things to them, behold, a certain ruler having come, was kneeling down to Him, saying, “My daughter presently has died; but having come, lay Your hand upon her, and she will live.”
And having arisen, Jesus followed him, also His disciples.
And behold a woman having had a flux of blood twelve years, having come up behind Him, touched the fringe of His garment.
For she was saying within herself, “If only I shall touch His garment, I will be healed.”
And Jesus, having turned and having seen her said, “Take courage, daughter. Your faith has cured you.” And the woman was cured from that very hour.
And Jesus having come into the ruler’s house and having seen the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
He says, “Go away, for the girl is not dead, but sleeps.” And they began to laugh at Him.
And when the crowd had been put outside, having entered, He took hold of her hand, and the girl arose.
And this report went out into all that land.
And Jesus passing on from there, two blind men followed Him, crying out and saying, “Have mercy on us, Son of David.”
And having come into the house, the blind men came to Him, and Jesus says to them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” They say to him, “Yes, Lord.”
Then He touched their eyes, saying, “According to your faith be it to you.”
And their eyes were opened. And Jesus strictly instructed them, saying, “See that no one knows!”
But having gone out, they made Him known in all that land.
And as they were going out, behold, they brought to Him a mute man, possessed by a demon.
And the demon having been cast out, the mute man spoke. And the crowds marveled, saying, “Never thus was it seen in Israel.”
But the Pharisees were saying, “By the prince of the demons He casts out demons.”
And Jesus was going throughout all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness.
And having seen the crowds, He was moved with compassion for them, because they were wearied and cast away, as sheep not having a shepherd.
Then He says to His disciples, “The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the workmen are few.
Beseech the Lord of the harvest, therefore, that He might send out workmen into His harvest.”
And having summoned His twelve disciples, He gave to them authority over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out and to heal every disease and every sickness.
And these are the names of the twelve apostles: first Simon called Peter, and his brother Andrew; and James the son of Zebedee, and his brother John;
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus and Thaddaeus;
Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, the one also having betrayed Him.
These twelve, Jesus sent forth, having instructed them, saying: “Do not go into the way of the Gentiles and do not enter into any city of the Samaritans.
But go rather to those being the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And going on, proclaim, saying, ‘The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near!’
Heal the ailing, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons! Freely you received; freely give.
Take along neither gold nor silver nor copper in your belts,
nor provision-bag for the way, nor two tunics, nor sandals, nor a staff; for the workman is worthy of his provisions.
And into whatever city or village you enter, inquire who is worthy in it. Remain there until you go forth.
And entering into the house, greet it.
And if indeed the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
And whoever will not receive you nor will hear your words, shake off the dust of your feet going forth out of that house or that city!
Truly I say to you, on the day of judgment, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and of Gomorrah than for that city.
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; therefore be shrewd as serpents and innocent as doves.
But beware of men; for they will deliver you into the courts and they will flog you in their synagogues.
And you will be brought also before governors and kings on account of Me, as a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.
And when they deliver you up, do not be anxious how or what you should speak; for in that hour you will be given what you should say,
for you are not those speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
And brother will deliver up brother to death, and father, child; and children will rise up against parents and will put them to death.
And you will be hated by all on account of My name; but the one having endured to the end, he will be saved.
And whenever they persecute you in one city, flee to the next. For truly I say to you, you shall not have completed the cities of Israel until the Son of Man comes.
A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his master.
It is sufficient for the disciple that he become like his teacher, and the servant like his master. If the master of the house they called Beelzebul, how much more those of his household!
Therefore you should not fear them! For nothing is concealed that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.
What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops!
And you should not be afraid of those killing the body but not being able to kill the soul. Indeed rather you should fear the One being able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
Are not two sparrows sold for an assarion? And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father.
And even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Therefore you should not fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
Therefore everyone who will confess in Me before men, I also will confess in him before My Father in the heavens.
And whoever shall deny Me before men, I also will deny him before My Father in the heavens.
Do not think that I came to bring peace to the earth; I came not to bring peace, but a sword.
For I came to set at variance ‘A man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,
and the enemies of the man are his own household.’
The one loving father or mother above Me is not worthy of Me, and the one loving son or daughter above Me is not worthy of Me.
And he who does not take his cross and follow after Me is not worthy of Me.
The one having found his life will lose it, and the one having lost his life on account of Me will find it.
The One receiving you receives Me, and the one receiving Me receives the One having sent Me.
The one receiving a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive the reward of a prophet, and the one receiving a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive the reward of a righteous man.
And whoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones only a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he shall certainly not lose his reward.”
And it came to pass when Jesus had finished commanding His twelve disciples, He departed from there to teach and to preach in their cities.
And John, having heard in prison the works of the Christ, having sent two of his disciples,
said to Him, “Are You the coming One, or are we to look for another?”
And Jesus answering, said to them, “Having gone, relate to John what you hear and see:
The blind receive sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and the poor are gospelized.
And blessed is he who shall not fall away in Me.”
And as these were going away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
But what did you go out to see? A man having been dressed in delicate clothing? Behold, those wearing delicate clothing are in kings’ houses.
But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I say to you, and one more excellent than a prophet.
For this is he about whom it has been written: ‘Behold, I send My messenger before Your face, who will prepare Your way before You.’
Truly I say to you, among those born of women there has not risen one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the least in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he!
And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence and the violent seize it.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
And if you are willing to receive it, he is Elijah, the one being about to come.
The one having ears, let him hear!
But to what will I compare this generation? It is like little children sitting in the markets and calling out to others,
saying: ‘We piped for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge and you did not wail.’
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Behold a man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and of sinners!’ But wisdom is justified by her deeds.”
Then He began to denounce the cities in which most of His miracles had taken place, because they did not repent.
“Woe to you Chorazin! Woe to you Bethsaida! For if the miracles having taken place in you had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, then they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say to you, in the day of judgment it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for you.
And you, Capernaum, will not be exalted to heaven, but will be brought down to Hades! For if the miracles having taken place in you had taken place in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
But I say to you that in day of judgment it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom than for you.”
At that time, Jesus answering said, “I fully consent to You, Father, Lord of the heaven and the earth, that You did hide these things from the wise and learned, and did reveal them to little children.
Yes, Father, for this was well-pleasing before You.
All things have been delivered to Me by My Father. And no one knows the Son, except the Father; nor does anyone know the Father, except the Son, and to whom the Son might choose to reveal Him.
Come to Me, all those toiling and being burdened, and I will give you rest.
Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.”
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbaths, and His disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck the heads of grain and to eat them.
And the Pharisees, having seen, said to Him, “Behold, Your disciples are doing what it is not lawful to do on Sabbath.”
And He said to them, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, and those with him—
how he entered into the house of God, and they ate the loaves of the presentation, which it was not lawful for him nor for those with him to eat, but only for the priests?
Or have you not read in the law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are guiltless?
But I say to you that a greater than the temple is here.
But if you had known what this is, ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ then you would not have condemned the guiltless.
For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
And having departed from there, He went into their synagogue.
And behold, a man having a withered hand, and they asked Him saying, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbaths?”—so that they might accuse Him.
And He said to them, “What man will there be among you, who will have one sheep, and if it falls into a pit on the Sabbaths, will not take hold of it and will raise it up?
How much more valuable therefore is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbaths.”
Then He says to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and it was restored, as sound as the other.
And the Pharisees having gone out, held a counsel against Him, how they might destroy Him.
And Jesus having known, withdrew from there. And great multitudes followed Him, and He healed them all,
and He warned them that they should not make Him known—
so that it might be fulfilled that having been spoken by the prophet Isaiah, saying:
“Behold My servant, whom I have chosen, My beloved, in whom My soul has found delight. I will put My Spirit upon Him, and He will proclaim justice to the Gentiles.
He will not quarrel nor will he cry out; nor will anyone hear His voice in the streets.
A bruised reed He will not break, and a smoldering wick He will not quench, until He leads justice to victory.
And in His name the Gentiles will hope.”
Then was brought to Him one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, and He healed him, in order for the mute man to speak and to see.
And all the crowds were amazed, and were saying, “Could this be the son of David?”
And the Pharisees having heard, said, “This man casts out the demons only by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.”
And having known their thoughts, He said to them, “Every kingdom having been divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house having been divided against itself will not stand.
And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? On account of this, they will be your judges.
But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Or how is anyone able to enter into the house of the strong man, and to plunder his goods, unless first he binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.
The one not being with Me is against Me, and the one not gathering with Me scatters.
Because of this I say to you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men; but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
And if anyone speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but if anyone speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one.
Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad. For the tree is known by the fruit.
Offspring of vipers, how are you able to speak good things, being evil? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
The good man out of his good treasure puts forth good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure puts forth evil things.
And I say to you that every careless word that they will speak, men will give an account of it in day of judgment.
For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying “Teacher, we wish to see a sign from You.”
And answering He said to them, “An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
For just as Jonah was in the belly of the great fish three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it. For they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this the generation and will condemn it. For she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
Now when the unclean spirit is gone out from the man, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, and does not find it.
Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from where I came out.’ And having come, it finds it being unoccupied, and swept, and put in order.
Then it goes and takes with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself; and having entered in, they dwell there, and the last of that the man becomes worse than the first. So also will it be unto this evil generation.”
Now while He was speaking to the crowds, behold, His mother and brothers were standing outside, seeking to speak to Him.
Then someone said to Him, “Behold, Your mother and Your brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak to You.”
And answering, He said to the one telling Him, “Who is My mother, and who are My brothers?”
And having stretched out His hand to His disciples, He said, “Behold, My mother and My brothers.
For whoever shall do the will of My Father who is in the heavens, he is My brother and sister and mother.”
In that same day, Jesus, having gone forth from the house, was sitting by the sea.
And great crowds were gathered together to Him, so that He having entered into a boat, sat down, and all the crowd stood on the shore.
And He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, “Behold, the one sowing went out to sow.
And in his sowing, indeed some fell along the road, and the birds having come, devoured them.
And other fell upon the rocky places where it did not have much soil. And it sprang up immediately, through having no depth of soil.
And the sun having risen, they were scorched, and through not having root, were dried up.
And other fell upon the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
And other fell upon the good soil and were yielding fruit—indeed some a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.
The one having ears, let him hear!”
And the disciples having approached, said to Him, “Why do You speak to them in parables?”
And answering He said to them, “Because it has been granted to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it has not been granted.
For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will be in abundance. And whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Because of this I speak to them in parables: ‘Because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand.’
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, saying: ‘In hearing you will hear and never understand; and in seeing you will see and never perceive.
For the heart of this people has grown dull, and they barely hear with the ears, and they have closed their eyes, lest ever they should see with the eyes, and they should hear with the ears, and they should understand with the heart, and should turn, and I will heal them.’
But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
For truly I say to you that many prophets and righteous men longed to see what you see, and did not see; and to hear what you hear, and did not hear.
You, therefore, hear the parable of the one having sown:
Everyone hearing the word of the kingdom and not understanding, the evil one comes and snatches away that having been sown in his heart. This is the one having been sown on the path.
And the one having been sown upon the rocky places, this is the one hearing the word and immediately receiving it with joy.
And he has in himself no root, but is temporary. And having come tribulation or persecution on account of the word, immediately he falls away.
And the one having been sown among the thorns, this is the one hearing the word, but the care of this present age and the deceit of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
But the one having been sown on the good soil, this is the one hearing the word and understanding, who indeed brings forth fruit and produces—indeed, some a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.”
He put before them another parable, saying, “The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man having sown good seed in his field.
And while the men are sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds in the midst of the wheat, and went away.
And when the plants sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared.
And the servants, having approached the master of the house, said to him, ‘Sir, did you not sow good seed in your field? How then does it have weeds?’
And he said to them, ‘An enemy did this.’ And the servants said to him, ‘Then do you desire that having gone forth, we should gather them?’
And he said, ‘No, lest gathering the weeds, you would uproot the wheat with them.
Allow both to grow together until the harvest; and in the time of the harvest I will say to the harvesters, “First gather the weeds, and bind them into bundles in order to burn them; then gather together the wheat into my barn.”’”
He put before them another parable, saying: “The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man having taken, sowed in his field,
which indeed is smallest of all the seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the garden plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and encamp in its branches.”
He spoke to them another parable: “The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman having taken, hid in three measures of flour until all of it was leavened.”
Jesus spoke all these things to the crowds in parables, and He was not speaking to them without a parable,
so that it might be fulfilled that having been spoken by the prophet, saying: “I will open My mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.”
Then having dismissed the crowds, He went into the house. And His disciples came to Him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field.”
And answering He said, “The One sowing the good seed is the Son of Man;
and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; and the weeds are the sons of the evil one;
and the enemy having sown them is the devil; and the harvest is the consummation of the age; and the harvesters are angels.
Therefore, as the weeds are gathered and consumed in fire, so will it be in the consummation of the age.
The Son of Man will send forth His angels, and they will gather out of His kingdom all the stumbling blocks and those practicing lawlessness,
and they will cast them into the furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Then the righteous will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. The one having ears, let him hear!
The kingdom of the heavens is like treasure having been hidden in the field, which a man having found, hid. And for joy over it, he goes and he sells all that he has, and buys that field.
Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking fine pearls.
And having found one very precious pearl, having gone away, he has sold all things as many as he had, and bought it.
Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet having been cast into the sea, and having gathered together of every kind,
which when it was filled, they having drawn it up on the shore and having sat down, collected the good into vessels, and they cast out the bad.
Thus will it be in the consummation of the age: The angels will go out and will separate the evil from the midst of the righteous,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.
Have you understood all these things?” “Yes,” they say to Him.
And He said to them, “Because of this, every scribe having been discipled into the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a master of a house, who puts forth out of his treasure new and old.”
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these parables, He withdrew from there.
And having come into His own region, He was teaching them in their synagogue, so that they are astonished and are saying, “From where came to this One this wisdom and these miraculous powers?
Is this not the son of the carpenter? Is not His mother called Mary, and His brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?
And are not all His sisters with us? Then from where came to this One all these things?”
And they were offended at Him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in the hometown and in his own household.”
And He did not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the news of Jesus,
and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead, and because of this, the miraculous powers are working in him.”
For Herod, having seized John, bound him and put him in prison, on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip.
For John had been saying to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
Although wishing to kill him, he feared the multitude, because they were holding him as a prophet.
But on the birthday of Herod having been celebrated, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst, and pleased Herod,
whereupon he promised with an oath to give to her whatever she should ask.
And having been urged on by her mother she says, “Give me here upon a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
And the king having been grieved, on account of the oaths and those reclining with him, he commanded it to be given.
And having sent, he beheaded John in the prison.
And his head was brought on a platter and was given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
And his disciples having come, took the body and buried it, and having come, they told Jesus.
And Jesus having heard, withdrew from there by boat to a secluded place by Himself. And the crowds having heard of it, followed Him on foot from the towns.
And having gone out, He saw a great crowd and was moved with compassion toward them, and He healed their sick.
And evening having come, the disciples came to Him saying, “This place is desolate, and the time already is gone by. Therefore dismiss the crowds, that having gone into the villages, they might buy food for themselves.”
And Jesus said to them, “They have no need to go away. You give to them something to eat.”
And they say to Him, “We have here only five loaves and two fish.”
And He said, “Bring them here to Me.”
And having commanded the crowds to sit down on the grass, having taken the five loaves and the two fish, having looked up to heaven, He spoke a blessing. And having broken, He gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds.
And all ate and were satisfied, and they took up that being over and above of the fragments, twelve hand-baskets full.
And those eating were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
And immediately He compelled the disciples to enter into the boat and to go before Him to the other side, until He would have dismissed the crowds.
And having dismissed the crowds, He went up on the mountain by Himself to pray. And evening having arrived, He was there alone,
and the boat being now many stadia from the land, tossed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
And in the fourth watch of the night, He went to them, walking on the sea.
And the disciples having seen Him walking on the sea, were troubled saying, “It is a ghost!” And they cried out in fear.
But immediately Jesus spoke to them saying, “Take courage! It is I. Fear not.”
And Peter answering said to Him, “Lord, if it is You, command me to come to You upon the waters.”
And He said, “Come.” And Peter having descended from the boat, walked upon the water and came to Jesus.
And seeing the charging wind, he was afraid, and having begun to sink, he cried out saying, “Lord, save me!”
And immediately Jesus having stretched out the hand, took hold of him and says to him, “O Little faith, why did you waver?”
And they having entered into the boat, the wind ceased.
And those in the boat worshiped Him, saying, “Truly You are Son of God.”
And having crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
And the men of that place having recognized Him, sent to all that surrounding region, and brought to Him all those being sick,
and were begging Him that only they might touch the fringe of His garment, and as many as touched were cured.
Then Pharisees and scribes come to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying,
“Why do Your disciples break the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they shall eat bread.”
And answering He said to them, “Why also do you break the commandment of God on account of your tradition?
For God commanded, ‘Honor the Father and mother’ and, ‘The one speaking evil of father or mother, in death must end!’
But you say, ‘Whoever shall say to the father or mother, “Whatever you might be profited by me is a gift,”
he shall not honor his father or his mother.’ And you made void the commandment of God on account of your tradition!
Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied rightly concerning you, saying,
‘This people honors Me with the lips, but their heart is kept far away from Me.
And in vain they worship Me, teaching as doctrines the precepts of men.’”
And having summoned the crowd, He said to them, “Hear and understand!
It is not what is entering into the mouth that defiles the man; but that going forth out of the mouth, this defiles the man.”
Then the disciples having approached, said to Him, “Do You know that the Pharisees, having heard this saying, were offended?”
And answering He said, “Every plant that My Heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.
Leave them! They are blind guides of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
And Peter answering said to Him, “Explain this parable to us.”
And He said, “Are you also still without understanding?
Do you not yet understand that everything entering into the mouth goes into the stomach, and is cast out into the sewer?
But the things going forth out of the mouth come forth out of the heart, and these defile the man.
For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies, slanders.
These are the things defiling the man, but to eat with unwashed hands does not defile the man.”
And having gone forth from there, Jesus withdrew to the district of Tyre and Sidon.
And behold, a Canaanite woman from the same region having approached, was crying out saying, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is miserably possessed by a demon.”
But He did not answer her a word. And His disciples having approached, were imploring Him, saying, “Dismiss her, for she cries out after us!”
And answering He said, “I was sent only to those being lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
And having come, she was worshiping Him saying, “Lord, help me!”
And answering He said, “It is not right to take the children’s bread and to cast it to the dogs.”
And she said, “Yes Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs falling from their masters’ table.”
Then Jesus answering said to her, “O woman, great is your faith. It shall be to you as you desire.” And her daughter was healed from that very hour.
And having departed from there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee, and having gone up on the mountain, He was sitting there.
And great crowds came to Him, having with them the lame, crippled, blind, mute, and many others. And they placed them at His feet, and He healed them,
so that the crowd marveled, seeing the mute speaking, the crippled restored, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
And Jesus, having called His disciples to Him, said, “I am moved with compassion toward the crowd, because they continue with Me three days already and have nothing that they might eat. And I am not willing to send them away hungry, lest they faint on the way.”
And the disciples say to Him, “From where will be to us in a secluded place so many loaves, as so great a crowd to satisfy?”
And Jesus says to them, “How many loaves do you have?” And they said, “Seven, and a few small fish.”
And having commanded the crowds to sit down on the ground,
having taken the seven loaves and the fish, and having given thanks, He broke them and kept giving them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowd.
And all ate and were satisfied, and they took up that being over and above of the fragments, seven baskets full.
And those eating were four thousand men, besides women and children.
And having dismissed the crowds, He entered into the boat and came to the region of Magadan.
And the Pharisees and Sadducees having approached testing Him, asked Him to show them a sign out of heaven.
And answering He said to them, “Evening having come, you say, ‘Fair weather, for the sky is red,’
and in the morning, ‘Today a storm, for the sky is red, being overcast.’ Indeed you know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but the signs of the times you are not able!
An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” And having left them, He went away.
And the disciples, having come to the other side, forgot to take bread.
And Jesus said to them, “Watch and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, “It is because we did not take bread.”
But having known this, Jesus said, “Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, because you did not take bread?
Do you not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many hand-baskets you gathered?
Nor the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you gathered?
How do you not understand that I did not speak to you concerning bread, but to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?”
Then they understood that He did not say to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And Jesus having come into the district of Caesarea Philippi, He was questioning His disciples saying, “Whom do men pronounce the Son of Man to be?”
And they said, “Some indeed, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
He says to them, “But whom do you pronounce Me to be?”
And Simon Peter answering said, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
And Jesus answering, said to him, “Blessed are you, Simon Barjona! For flesh and blood did not reveal it to you, but My Father in the heavens.
And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, and the gates of Hades not will prevail against it.
I will give to you the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you might bind on the earth shall have been bound in the heavens, and whatever you might loose on the earth shall have been loosed in the heavens.”
Then He instructed the disciples that they should tell no one that He is the Christ.
From that time Jesus began to show to His disciples that it is necessary for Him to go away to Jerusalem, and to suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be killed, and to be raised on the third day.
And Peter having taken Him aside, began to rebuke Him, saying, “Far be it from You, Lord! This never will be to You!”
And having turned, He said to Peter, “Get behind Me Satan! You are a stumbling block to Me. For your thoughts are not of the things of God, but the things of men.”
Then Jesus said His to disciples, “If anyone desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.
For whoever might desire to save his life will lose it; but whoever might lose his life on account of Me will find it.
For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world, but loses his soul? Or what will a man give as an exchange for his soul?
For the Son of Man is about to come in the glory His Father, with His angels, and then He will give to each according to his deeds.
Truly I say to you, there are some of those standing here who shall not taste of death until they have seen the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.”
And after six days, Jesus takes with Him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and brings them up into a high mountain by themselves.
And He was transfigured before them, and His face shone like the sun, and His clothes became white as the light.
And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with Him.
And Peter answering said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If You wish, I will make here three tabernacles: one for You, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
While yet he was speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and behold, a voice out of the cloud saying, “This is My Son, the beloved, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to Him!”
And the disciples having heard it, fell upon their face and were greatly terrified.
And Jesus having come to them and having touched them, said, “Rise up, and do not be afraid.”
And having lifted up their eyes, they saw no one except Jesus Himself alone.
And as they were descending from the mountain, Jesus instructed them, saying, “Tell to no one the vision, until the Son of Man is risen out from the dead.”
And the disciples asked Him, saying, “Why then do the scribes say that it behooves Elijah to come first?”
And answering He said, “Elijah indeed comes and will restore all things.
But I say to you that Elijah already is come, and they did not know him, but did to him whatever they desired. Thus also, the Son of Man is about to suffer from them.”
Then the disciples understood that He spoke to them concerning John the Baptist.
And they having come to the crowd, a man came to Him kneeling down to Him
and saying, “Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic and suffers miserably; for often he falls into the fire, and often into the water.
And I brought him Your to disciples, and they were not able to heal him.”
And Jesus answering said, “O unbelieving and perverted generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him here to Me.”
And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon went out from him, and the boy was healed from that hour.
Then the disciples, having come to Jesus in private, said, “Why were we not able to cast it out?”
And He said to them, “Because of your little faith. For truly I say to you, if you have faith as of a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. And nothing will be impossible for you.”

And while they were abiding in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is about to be betrayed into the hands of men,
and they will kill Him, and on the third day He will be raised up.” And they were deeply grieved.
And they having come to Capernaum, those collecting the didrachmas came to Peter and said, “Does your Teacher pay the didrachmas?”
He says, “Yes.” And he having entered into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive custom or tribute? From their sons, or from strangers?”
And he having said, “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are free.
But that we might not offend them, having gone to the sea, cast a hook and take the first fish having come up, and having opened its mouth, you will find a stater. Having taken that, give it to them for Me and yourself.”
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, “Who then is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?”
And having summoned a child, He set it in their midst,
and said, “Truly I say to you, if you are not converted and become as the little children, you shall never enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
Therefore whoever will humble himself as this little child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens.
And whoever shall receive one such little child in My name, receives Me.
And whoever shall cause to stumble one of these of the little ones believing in Me, it is better for him that a heavy millstone should be hung around his neck, and he be sunk in the depth of the sea.
Woe to the world because of the causes of sin. For the stumbling blocks are necessary to come, but woe to the man by whom the offense comes!
Now if your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and cast it from you; it is better for you to enter into life crippled or lame, than having two hands or two feet, to be cast into the eternal fire.
And if your eye causes you to sin, gouge it out and cast it from you; it is better for you to enter into life one-eyed, than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire.
See that you do not despise one of these little ones. For I say to you that their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father, who is in the heavens.

What do you think? If to any man there should be a hundred sheep, and one of them has gone astray, will he not leave the ninety nine on the mountains and, having gone, seek the one going astray?
And if he should find it, truly I say to you that he rejoices over it more than over the ninety nine not having gone astray.
Thus it is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should perish.
And if your brother sins against you, go reprove him, between you and him alone. If he will hear you, you have gained your brother.
But if he will not hear, take with you one or two more, that ‘every word may be strengthened upon the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
And if he fails to listen to them, tell it to the church. And if he fails to listen to even to the church, let him be to you as the pagan and the tax collector.
Truly I say to you, whatever you shall bind on earth shall have been bound in heaven, and whatever you shall loose on the earth shall have been loosed in heaven.
Again truly I say to you that if two of you on the earth might agree concerning any matter that they shall ask, it will be done for them by My Father who is in the heavens.
For where two or three are gathered together unto My name, there am I in their midst.”
Then Peter having come, said to Him, “Lord, how often will my brother sin against me, and I will forgive him? Up to seven times?”
Jesus says to him, “I say to you not up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven!
Because of this, the kingdom of the heavens has become like to a man, a king, who desired to settle accounts with his servants.
And he having begun to settle, one was brought to him, a debtor of ten thousand talents.
And of him having nothing to pay, the master commanded him to be sold, and the wife and children, and everything that he had, and payment to be made.
Therefore the servant, having fallen down, was bowing on his knees to him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay everything to you.’
And the master of that servant having been moved with compassion, released him and forgave him the debt.
But the same servant having gone out, found one of his fellow servants who was owing him a hundred denarii, and having seized him, he was throttling him, saying, ‘Pay what you owe.’
Therefore his fellow servant having fallen down, was begging him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you.’
But he was not willing. Rather, having gone, he cast him into prison until he should pay what was owed.
Therefore his fellow servants having seen the things having taken place, were deeply grieved, and having gone, narrated to their master everything having taken place.
Then his master having called him, says to him, ‘Evil servant, I forgave you all that debt because you begged me.
Did it not behoove you also to have pitied your fellow servant, as I also had pitied you?’
And having been angry, his master delivered him to the jailers, until that he should pay all being owed to him.
Thus also My Heavenly Father will do to you, unless each of you forgives his brother from your heart.”
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these words, He withdrew from Galilee and came to the region of Judea, beyond the Jordan.
And great crowds followed Him, and He healed them there.
And Pharisees came to Him, testing Him and saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for every cause?”
And answering He said, “Have you not read that the One having created from the beginning ‘made them male and female,’
and said, ‘On account of this a man will leave the father and mother and be joined with his wife, and the two will become into one flesh’?—
so that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God united together, let man not separate.”
They say to Him, “Why then did Moses command to give a roll of divorce and to send her away?”
He says to them, “In view of your hardness of heart, Moses allowed you to divorce your wives; but it was not this way from the beginning.
And I say to you that whoever shall divorce his wife except for sexual immorality, and shall marry another, commits adultery.”
His disciples say to Him, “If this is the case of the man with the wife, it is better not to marry.”
And He said to them, “Not all receive this word, but only those to whom it has been given.
For there are eunuchs who were born thus from their mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of the heavens. The one being able to receive it, let him receive it.”
Then little children were brought to Him, that He might lay the hands on them, and might pray. But the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said, “Permit the little children, and do not forbid them to come to Me, for of such is the kingdom of the heavens.”
And having laid the hands upon them, He departed from there.
And behold, one having come to Him said, “Teacher, what good thing shall I do that I might have eternal life?”
And He said to him, “Why do you ask Me about what is good? Only One is good. But if you desire to enter into life, keep the commandments.”
He says to Him, “Which?” And Jesus said, “‘You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not bear false witness,
you shall honor the father and mother, and you shall love your neighbor as yourself.’”
The young man says to him, “All these things I have kept. What do I still lack?”
Jesus was saying to him, “If you desire to be perfect, go, sell what you are possessing, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come, follow Me.”
And having heard this statement, the young man went away grieving; for he was one having many possessions.
And Jesus said His to disciples, “Truly I say to you that with difficulty a rich man will enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
And the disciples having heard were exceedingly astonished, saying, “Who then is able to be saved?”
And Jesus having looked on them, said to them, “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Then Peter answering said to Him, “Behold, we left all things and followed You; what then will be to us?”
And Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you that in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit down upon His throne of glory, you having followed Me, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for the sake of My name, will receive a hundredfold, and will inherit eternal life.
But many who are first will be last, and the last first.
For the kingdom of the heavens is like to a man, a master of a house, who went out in the morning to hire workmen for his vineyard.
And having agreed with the workmen on a denarius for the day, he sent them into his vineyard.
And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace,
and to them he said, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and I will give you whatever might be right.’
And they went. And having gone out again about the sixth and ninth hour, he did likewise.
And about the eleventh having gone out, he found others standing, and says to them, ‘Why do you stand here all the day idle?’
They say to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He says to them, ‘You go also into the vineyard.’
And evening having arrived, the master of the vineyard says to his foreman, ‘Call the workmen and pay them the wages, having begun from the last, up to the first.’
And those hired about the eleventh hour having come, they received a denarius each.
And the first having come, they thought that they will receive more, but they themselves also received a denarius each.
And having received it, they were grumbling against the master of the house,
saying, ‘These the last have worked one hour, and you have made them equal to us, the ones having borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.’
And answering one of them, he said, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius?
Take what is yours and go; and I desire to give to this last, as to you also.
Or is it not lawful for me to do what I will with that which is mine? Or is your eye envious because I am generous?’
Thus the last will be first, and the first, last.”
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, He took the twelve disciples aside themselves on the way, and said to them,
“Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn Him to death.
And they will betray Him to the Gentiles to mock and to flog and to crucify; and the third day He will rise again.”
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to Him with her sons, kneeling down and asking something from Him.
And He said to her, “What do you desire?” She says to Him, “Say that these two sons of mine might sit, one on Your right hand and one on Your left hand, in Your kingdom.”
And Jesus answering, said, “You do not know what you ask for. Are you able to drink the cup which I am about to drink?” They say to Him, “We are able.”
He says to them, “Indeed you will drink My cup, but to sit on My right hand and on My left, this is not Mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared by My Father.”
And the ten having heard this, were indignant about the two brothers.
And Jesus having summoned them, said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and the great ones exercise authority over them.
Thus will it not be among you. But whoever wishes to become great among you, he will be your servant;
and whoever wishes to be first among you, he will be your slave—
even as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many.”
And as they were going out from Jericho, a great crowd followed Him.
And behold, two blind men sitting beside the road, having heard that Jesus is passing by, cried out saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
And the crowd rebuked them that they should be silent. But they cried out all the more, saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
And Jesus having stopped, called them and said, “What do you desire I should do unto you?”
They say to Him, “Lord, that our eyes might be opened.”
And having been moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes; and immediately they received sight, and they followed Him.
And when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them, “Go into the village in front of you, and immediately you will find a donkey having been tied, and a colt with her. Having untied them, bring them to Me,
and if anyone says anything to you, you will say that the Lord has need of them, and he will send them immediately.”
And this came to pass, that it might be fulfilled that having been spoken by the prophet, saying,
“Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Behold, your King comes to you, gentle and mounted on a donkey, even upon a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’”
And the disciples having gone and having done as Jesus commanded them,
brought the donkey and the colt and put their cloaks upon them, and He sat on them.
And the very great crowd spread their the cloaks on the road, and others were cutting down branches from the trees and were spreading them on the road.
And the crowds going before Him and those following were crying out, saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David!” “Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord!” “Hosanna in the highest!”
And of Him having entered into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying, “Who is this?”
And the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet, Jesus, the One from Nazareth of Galilee.”
And Jesus entered into the temple and cast out all those selling and buying in the temple, and He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those selling the doves.
And He says to them, “It has been written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer.’ But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
And the blind and the lame came to Him in the temple, and He healed them.
And the chief priests and the scribes, having seen the wonders that He did and the children crying out in the temple and saying, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” were indignant
and said to Him, “Do you hear what these say?” And Jesus says to them, “Yes, have you never read: ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings You have prepared for yourself praise’?”
And having left them, He went out of the city to Bethany, and He passed the night there.
And in the morning, having come back into the city, He became hungry.
And having seen one fig tree along the road, He came to it and found nothing on it except only leaves. And He says to it, “Never let there be any more fruit from you, to the age.” And the fig tree withered immediately.
And having seen it, the disciples marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree wither so quickly?”
And Jesus answering said to them, “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and not do doubt, you will do not only this of the fig tree, but even if you should say to this mountain, ‘Be you taken away and be you cast into the sea,’ it will come to pass.
And all things, as many as you might ask in prayer, believing, you will receive.”
And of Him having come into the temple, teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to Him, saying, “By what authority are You doing these things? And who gave to You this authority?”
And Jesus answering, said to them, “I also will ask you one thing, which if you tell Me, I also will say to you by what authority I do these things.
From where was the baptism of John? From heaven, or from men?” And they were reasoning with themselves, saying, “If we should say, ‘from heaven,’ He will say to us, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
But if we should say, ‘from men,’ we fear the multitude; for all hold John as a prophet.”
And answering Jesus, they said “We do not know.” And He said to them, “Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
But what do you think? A man had two sons, and having come to the first he said, ‘Son, go work in the vineyard today.’
And answering he said, ‘I will not.’ But afterward, having repented, he went.
And having come to the second, he said likewise. And answering he said, ‘I will sir,’ and he did not go.
Which of the two did the will of the father?” They say, “The first.” Jesus says to them, “Truly I say to you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes go before you into the kingdom of God.
For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him; and you having seen, did not even repent afterward to believe him.
Hear another parable: There was a man, a master of a house, who planted a vineyard, and placed around it a fence, and dug a winepress in it, and built a tower; and he rented it out to farmers and traveled abroad.
And when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruits.
And the farmers having taken his servants, one they beat, and one they killed, and one they stoned.
Again he sent other servants, more than the first, and they did likewise to them.
And afterward he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
But the farmers having seen the son, said among themselves, ‘This is the heir; come, let us kill him and gain possession of his inheritance.’
And having taking him, they cast him out of the vineyard and killed him.
Therefore when the master of the vineyard shall come, what will he do to those farmers?”
They say to him, “He will destroy them, the wretches, grievously, and he will rent out the vineyard to other farmers who will give to him the fruits in their seasons.”
Jesus says to them, “Did you never read in the Scriptures: ‘The stone that those building rejected, this has become the chief corner. This was from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
Because of this I say to you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a people producing its fruits.
And the one having fallen on this stone will be broken; but on whomever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.”
And the chief priests and the Pharisees, having heard His parables, knew that He speaks about them.
And seeking to lay hold of Him, they feared the crowds, because they were holding Him as a prophet.
And answering, Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying,
“The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man, a king, who made a wedding feast for his son.
And he sent his servants to call those having been invited to the wedding feast—and they were not willing to come.
Again he sent other servants, saying, ‘Say to those having been invited, “Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My oxen and the fatlings have been killed, and all things are ready; come to the wedding feast.”’
And having paid no attention they went away, one to the own field, and one to his business.
And the rest, having laid hold of his servants, mistreated and killed them.
And the king was angry, and having sent his armies, he destroyed those murderers and burned their city.
Then he says to his servants, ‘Indeed the wedding feast is ready, but those having been invited were not worthy.
Therefore go into the thoroughfares of the highways, and invite to the wedding feast as many as you shall find.’
And those servants, having gone out into the highways, brought together all, as many as they found, both evil and good; and the wedding hall became full of those reclining.
And the king having entered in to see those reclining, he beheld a man there not being dressed in wedding clothes.
And he says to him, ‘Friend, how did you enter here not having a wedding garment?’ And he was speechless.
Then the king said to the servants, ‘Having bound his hands and feet, cast him out into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.’
For many are called, but few chosen.”
Then the Pharisees having gone out, took counsel how they might trap Him in His words.
And they send their disciples to Him, with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that You are true, and You teach the way of God in the truth, and to You there is care about no one, for You do not look on the appearance of men.
Therefore tell us, what do You think? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?”
But having known their malice, Jesus said, “Hypocrites, why do you test Me?
Show Me the coin of the tribute.” And they presented to Him a denarius.
And He says to them, “Whose likeness and whose inscription is this?”
They say to Him, “Caesar’s.” Then He says to them, “Therefore give back to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God.”
And having heard, they marveled. And having left Him, they went away.
On that day Sadducees, those saying there is no resurrection, came to Him, and they questioned Him,
saying, “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If anyone should die not having children, his brother will marry his wife and will raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers among us; and the first died, and having married not having seed, he left his wife to his brother.
Likewise also the second, and the third, unto the seventh.
And last of all, the woman died.
In the resurrection, therefore, of which of the seven will she be wife? For all had her.”
And, Jesus answering said to them, “You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection, neither do they marry, nor are given in marriage, but they are like angels in heaven.
And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read that which has been spoken to you by God, saying,
‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob?’ He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”
And the crowds having heard, were astonished at His teaching.
And the Pharisees, having heard that He had silenced the Sadducees, were gathered together the same.
And one of them, a lawyer, questioned Him, testing Him,
“Teacher, which commandment is the greatest in the Law?”
And He said to him, “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.’
This is the great and first commandment.
And the second is like it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’
On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.”
And the Pharisees having been assembled together, Jesus questioned them,
saying, “What do you think concerning the Christ? Of whom is He son?” They say to Him, “Of David.”
He says to them, “How then does David in spirit call Him Lord, saying:
‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand, until I place Your enemies as a footstool for Your feet.”’
If therefore David calls Him Lord, how is He his son?”
And no one was able to answer Him a word, nor did anyone dare from that day to question Him any longer.
Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to His disciples,
saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees have sat down on Moses’ seat;
therefore keep and observe all things whatsoever they might tell you. But do not do according to their works, for they preach and do not act.
And they tie up burdens heavy and hard to bear and lay them on the shoulders of men; but they themselves are not willing to move them with their finger.
And they do all their deeds in order to be seen by men. For they broaden their phylacteries and enlarge their tassels,
and they love the chief place at the banquets, and the first seats in the synagogues,
and the greetings in the marketplaces, and to be called ‘Rabbi’ by men.
But you shall not be called ‘Rabbi,’ for your Teacher is One, and you are all brothers.
And call no one your father on the earth; for One is your Father, who is in heaven.
Neither be called instructors; since One is your instructor, the Christ.
But the greatest among you will be your servant.
And whoever shall exalt himself will be humbled, and whoever shall humble himself will be exalted.
But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut up the kingdom of the heavens before men. For you neither enter, nor even do you allow those who are entering to go in.

Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you traverse the sea and the dry land to make one convert, and whenever it may happen, you make him twofold more a son of Gehenna than yourselves.
Woe to you, blind guides, those saying, ‘Whoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gold of the temple is bound by his oath.’
Foolish and blind! For which is greater, the gold, or the temple having sanctified the gold?
And you say, ‘Whoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it is bound by his oath.’
Blind! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar sanctifying the gift?
Therefore the one having sworn by the altar swears by it and by all things that are upon it.
And the one having sworn by the temple swears by it and by the One dwelling in it.
And the one having sworn by heaven swears by the throne of God and by the One sitting upon it.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you pay tithes of mint and dill and cummin, and you have neglected the weightier things of the Law: justice and mercy and faithfulness. It behooved you to do these, and not to be leaving aside those.
Blind guides—those straining out the gnat and swallowing the camel!
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of greed and intemperance.
Blind Pharisee! First cleanse the inside of the cup and of the dish, that their outside might become clean also.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like tombs having been whitewashed, which indeed outwardly appear beautiful, but inside they are full of bones of the dead, and of all impurity.
Thus indeed outwardly you also appear righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the righteous;
and you say, ‘If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.’
Thus you bear witness to yourselves that you are sons of those having murdered the prophets.
You, then, fill up the measure of your fathers.
Serpents! Offspring of vipers! How shall you escape from the sentence of Gehenna?
Because of this, behold, I send to you prophets and wise men and scribes. Some of them you will kill and will crucify, and some of them you will flog in your synagogues, and will persecute from town to town;
so that upon you shall come all the righteous blood being poured out upon the earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets and stoning those having been sent to her! How often would I have gathered together your children, the way in which a hen gathers together her chicks under the wings, and you were not willing!
Behold, your house is left to you desolate!
For I say to you, you shall not see Me from now until you say, ‘Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord.’”
And having gone forth from the temple, Jesus was going away, and His disciples came to Him to point out to Him the buildings of the temple.
And answering, He said to them, “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, no not even a stone shall be left here upon a stone, which will not be thrown down.”
And as He was sitting upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to Him in private, saying, “Tell us, when these things will be? And what is the sign of Your coming, and the consummation of the age?”
And Jesus answering, said to them, “Take heed, lest anyone mislead you.
For many will come in My name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will mislead many.
And you will begin to hear of wars and rumors of wars. Behold, do not be alarmed; for it is necessary to take place, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
And all these are the beginning of birth pains.
Then will they deliver you to tribulation, and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of My name.
And then many will fall away, and they will betray one another, and will hate one another;
and many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray.
And because lawlessness is to be multiplied, the love of the many will grow cold.
But the one having endured to the end, he will be saved.
And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole earth, for a testimony to all the nations; and then the end will come.
Therefore when you shall see ‘the abomination of desolation,’ having been spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place—the one reading, let him understand—
then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains;
the one on the housetop, do not let him come down to take anything out of his house;
and the one in the field, do not let him return back to take his cloak.
And woe to those having in womb, and to the ones nursing infants in those days!
But pray that your flight might not be in winter, nor on a Sabbath.
For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, and never shall be.
And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved; but because of the elect, those days will be shortened.
Then if anyone says to you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ,’ or ‘Here,’ do not believe it.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will give great signs and wonders, so as to mislead, if possible, even the elect.
Behold, I have foretold you.
Therefore if they say to you, ‘Behold, He is in the wilderness,’ do not go forth; or ‘Behold, in the inner rooms,’ do not believe.
For just as the lightning comes forth from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For wherever the carcass may be, there the vultures will be gathered.
And immediately after the tribulation of those days: ‘The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.’
And then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn. And they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
And He will send His angels with a great trumpet call, and they will gather together His elect from the four winds, from the ends of the heavens to the ends thereof.
Now learn the parable of the fig tree: When its branch already may have become tender and it puts forth leaves, you know that the summer is near.
So also you, when you see all these things, know that He is near, at the doors.
Truly I say to you that this generation will not have passed away until all these things shall have taken place.
The heaven and the earth will pass away, but My words shall not pass away.
But concerning that day and hour, no one knows, not even the angels of the heavens, nor the Son, except the Father only.
For as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For as in those days before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until that day Noah entered into the ark,
and they were unaware until the flood came and took away all; so also will be the coming of the Son of Man.
Then two will be in the field: one is taken, and one is left.
Two women will be grinding at the mill: one is taken, and one is left.
Therefore keep watch, for you do not know on what day your Lord comes.
And know this, that if the master of the house had known in what time of night the thief comes, he would have watched and not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Because of this, you also be ready, for the Son of Man comes in that hour you do not expect.
Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has set over his household, to give to them the food in season?
Blessed is that servant whom his master, having come, will find thus doing.
Truly I say to you that he will set him over all of his possessing.
But if that evil servant should say in his heart, ‘My master delays,’
and should begin to beat his fellow servants, and to eat and to drink with those being drunkards,
the master of that servant will come in a day in which he does not expect, and in an hour which he is unaware,
and will cut him in pieces, and will appoint his place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Then the kingdom of the heavens will be likened to ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went forth to meet the bridegroom.
And five of them were foolish, and five wise.
For the foolish, having taken their lamps, took no oil with them;
but the wise took oil in vessels with their lamps.
And the bridegroom tarrying, they all became drowsy and were sleeping.
And at the middle of the night, there was a cry: ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Go forth to meet him!’
Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
And the foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’
And the wise answered, saying, ‘No, lest it might not suffice for us and you. Go rather to those selling, and buy for yourselves.’
And while they are going away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those ready went in with him to the wedding feast. And the door was shut.
And afterward, the other virgins come also, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open to us!’
And answering he said, ‘Truly I say to you, I do not know you.’
Therefore watch, for you do not know the day, nor the hour.
For it is like a man going on a journey who called his own servants and delivered his possessing to them.
And indeed to one he gave five talents; and to one, two; and to one, one; to each according to his own ability. And he left the region immediately.
The one having received the five talents, having gone, traded with them, and made five more.
Likewise, the one with the two gained two more.
But the one having received the one talent, having gone away, dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
And after much time, the master of those servants comes and takes account with them.
And the one having received the five talents, having come, brought to him five other talents, saying, ‘Master, you did deliver to me five talents. Behold, I have gained five talents more.’
His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful over a few things; I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
And the one with the two talents, also having come said, ‘Master, you did deliver to me two talents. Behold, I have gained two talents more.’
His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful over a few things; I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
And the one having received the one talent, having come, also said, ‘Master, I knew you, that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering from where you did not scatter.
And having been afraid, having gone away, I hid your talent in the ground. Behold, you have what is yours.’
And his master answering, said to him, ‘Wicked and lazy servant! You knew that I reap where I did not sow and gather from where I did not scatter.
Therefore it behooved you to put my money to the bankers, and having come, I would have received my own with interest.
Therefore take the talent from him, and give it to the one having the ten talents.
For to everyone having will be given, and he will have in abundance. But the one not having, even that which he has will be taken away from him.
And cast out the worthless servant, into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
And when the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the angels with Him, then He will sit upon His throne of glory.
And all the nations will be gathered before Him, and He will separate them one from another, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
And indeed He will set the sheep on His right hand, and the goats on His left.
Then the King will say to those on His right hand, ‘Come, those being blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom having been prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I hungered, and you gave Me to eat; I thirsted, and you gave Me to drink; I was a stranger, and you took Me in;
naked, and you clothed Me; I was sick, and you visited Me; I was in prison, and you came to Me.’
Then the righteous will answer Him, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungering, and fed You? Or thirsting, and gave You to drink?
And when did we see You a stranger, and took You in? Or naked, and clothed You?
And when did we see You ailing or in prison, and came to You?’
And the King answering, will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these brothers of Mine, you did it to Me.’
Then also He will say to those on the left, ‘Depart from Me, those being cursed, into the eternal fire, having been prepared for the devil and his angels.
For I hungered, and you gave to Me nothing to eat; and I thirsted, and You gave Me nothing to drink;
I was a stranger, and You did not take Me in; naked, and you did not clothe Me; sick and in prison, and you did not visit Me.’
Then they also will answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister to You?’
Then He will answer them, saying, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of the least of these, neither did you to Me.’
And these will go away into eternal punishment; but the righteous into eternal life.”
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these words, He said to His disciples,
“You know that after two days the Passover takes place, and the Son of Man is delivered over to be crucified.”
Then the chief priests and the elders of the people were gathered together in the courtyard of the high priest, who is called Caiaphas,
and they plotted together, in order that they might seize Jesus by guile and kill Him.
But they were saying, “Not during the feast, lest there be a riot among the people.”
And of Jesus having been in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman came to Him, having an alabaster flask of very costly fragrant oil, and poured it on His head as He is reclining.
And the disciples having seen, became indignant, saying, “For what purpose is this waste?
For this could have been sold for much, and have been given to the poor.”
And Jesus having known, said to them, “Why do you cause trouble to the woman? For she did a beautiful work to Me.
For the poor you always have with you, but not always do you have Me.
For this woman, in pouring this fragrant oil on My body, did it for My burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this gospel shall be proclaimed in the whole world, that which this woman did also will be spoken of, for a memorial of her.”
Then one of the Twelve, the one being called Judas Iscariot, having gone to the chief priests,
said, “What are you willing to give me, and I will betray Him to you?” And they appointed to him thirty pieces of silver.
And from that time, he was seeking an opportunity that he might betray Him.
And on the first day of the unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying, “Where do you desire we should prepare for You to eat the Passover?”
And He said, “Go into the city unto a certain man and tell him the Teacher says, ‘My time is near; I will keep the Passover with you with My disciples.’”
And the disciples did as Jesus directed them, and prepared the Passover.
And evening having arrived, He was reclining with the twelve disciples.
And as they were eating, He said to them, “Truly I say to you that one of you will betray Me.”
And being grieved exceedingly, they began, each one, to say to Him, “Is it I, Lord?”
And answering He said, “The one having dipped the hand in the dish with Me, he will betray Me.
Indeed the Son of Man goes as it has been written about Him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for him if that man had not been born.”
And Judas who was betraying Him, answering, said, “Is it I, Rabbi?” He says to him, “You have said.”
Now as they were eating, Jesus, having taken bread and having blessed it, broke it, and having given it to the disciples, He said, “Take, eat; this is My body.”
And having taken the cup and having given thanks, He gave it to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you.
For this is My blood of the covenant, being poured out for many, for forgiveness of sins.
And I say to you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now until that the day when I drink it anew with you in the kingdom of My Father.”
And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus says to them, “You all will fall away because of Me during this night. For it has been written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
But I, after being raised, will go before you into Galilee.”
And Peter answering, said to Him, “If all will fall away because of You, I never will fall away.”
Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to you, during this night, before the rooster crowing, you will deny Me three times.”
Peter says to Him, “Even if it were necessary for me to die with You, I will never deny You.” And all the disciples said likewise.
Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane, and He says to the disciples, “Sit here until that having gone away over there, I shall pray.”
And having taken with Him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, He began to be sorrowful and deeply distressed.
Then He says to them, “My soul is very sorrowful, even to death. Remain here and watch with Me.”
And having gone forward a little, He fell upon His face, praying, and saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as You.”
And He comes to the disciples and finds them sleeping. And He says to Peter, “So, were you not able to watch with Me one hour?
Watch and pray, that you do not enter into temptation. For the spirit is willing, but the flesh weak.”
Again for a second time having gone away, He prayed, saying, “My Father, if this is not possible to pass unless I drink it, Your will be done.”
And having come again, He finds them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
And having left them again, having gone away, He prayed for the third time, having said the same thing again.
Then He comes to the disciples and says to them, “Sleep and take your rest later on. Behold, the hour has drawn near, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise up, let us go! Behold, he who is betraying Me has drawn near!”
And as He is still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the Twelve, came, and with him great a crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
And the one betraying Him gave them a sign, saying, “Whomever I shall kiss, it is He; seize Him.”
And having come up to Jesus immediately, he said, “Greetings, Rabbi,” and kissed Him.
And Jesus said to him, “Friend, for what are you come?” Then having approached, they laid hands on Jesus and seized Him.
And behold, one of those with Jesus, having stretched out the hand, drew his sword, and having struck the servant of the high priest, cut off his ear.
Then Jesus says to him, “Return your sword into its place; for all those having taken the sword, will perish by the sword.
Or do you think that I am not able to call upon My Father, and He will furnish to Me presently more than twelve legions of angels?
How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that it must be so?”
In that hour, Jesus said to the crowds, “Did you come out with swords and clubs, as against a robber, to capture Me? Every day in the temple I was sitting, teaching, and you did not seize Me.
And all this is come to pass, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” Then the disciples all, having forsaken Him, fled.
And those having seized Jesus led Him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
And Peter was following Him from afar, even to the court of the high priest. And having entered within, he was sitting with the guards to see the outcome.
And the chief priests and the whole Council were seeking false evidence against Jesus, so that they might put Him to death.
But they did not find any, of many false witnesses having come forward. And at last, two having come forward,
they said, “This man has been saying, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and to rebuild it in three days.’”
And the high priest having stood up, said to Him, “Answer you nothing? What do these witness against you?”
But Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to Him, “I adjure you by the living God, that You tell us if You are the Christ, the Son of God.”
Jesus says to him, “You have said. But I say to you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming upon the clouds of heaven.”
Then the high priest tears his garments, saying, “He has blasphemed; why do we have any more need of witnesses? Behold now, you have heard the blasphemy.
What do you think?” And answering they said, “He is deserving of death.”
Then they spat in His face and struck Him. And others slapped Him,
saying, “Prophesy to us, Christ, who is the one having struck You?”
And Peter was sitting outside in the court, and one servant girl came to him, saying, “You also were with Jesus the Galilean.”
And he denied it before all, saying, “I do not know what you say.”
And having gone out to the porch, another saw him, and says to those there, “This man was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
And again he denied it with an oath, “I do not know the man.”
And after a little while those standing by having approached, said to Peter, “Surely you are of them also, for even your speech gives you away.”
Then he began to curse and to swear, “I do not know the man!” And immediately a rooster crowed.
And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, He having said, “Before the rooster crowing, you will deny Me three times.” And having gone out, he wept bitterly.
And morning having arrived, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so that they might put Him to death.
And having bound Him, they led Him away and delivered Him to Pilate the governor.
Then Judas, the one having delivered Him up, having seen that He was condemned, having regretted it, he returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
saying, “I sinned, having betrayed innocent blood.” And they said, “What is that to us? You will see.”
And having cast down the pieces of silver into the temple, he withdrew, and having gone away, hanged himself.
And the chief priests, having taken the pieces of silver, said, “It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood.”
And having taken counsel, they bought with them the potter’s field, for a burial place for strangers.
Therefore that field was called Field of Blood, to this day.
Then was fulfilled that having been spoken by the prophet Jeremiah, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the One having been priced, whom they set a price on by the sons of Israel,
and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord directed me.”
Now Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor questioned Him, saying, “Are You the King of the Jews?” And Jesus said, “You say.”
And in His being accused by the chief priests and elders, He answered nothing.
Then Pilate says to Him, “Do You not hear how many things they witness against You?”
And He did not answer him, not even to one word, so as to amaze the governor exceedingly.
And at the feast, the governor was accustomed to release one prisoner to the multitude, whom they were wishing.
And at that time they were holding a notable prisoner called Barabbas.
Therefore of them being gathered together, Pilate said to them, “Whom want you that I shall release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?”
For he knew that they had delivered Him up through envy.
And as he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, “Nothing to you and that righteous man; for I suffered many things in a dream today because of Him.”
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds that they should ask for Barabbas, and should destroy Jesus.
And the governor answering said to them, “Which of the two do you desire that I release to you?” And they said, “Barabbas.”
Pilate says to them, “What then should I do with Jesus, who is called Christ?” They all say, “Let Him be crucified.”
And he said, “For what evil did He commit?” And they kept crying out all the more, saying, “Let Him be crucified.”
And Pilate having seen that it availed nothing, but rather a riot is arising, having taken water, washed the hands before the crowd, saying, “I am guiltless of the blood of this man. For yourselves you will see.”
And all the people answering said, “His blood be on us, and on our children.”
Then he released Barabbas to them; and having flogged Jesus, He delivered Him up that He might be crucified.
Then the soldiers of the governor, having taken Jesus into the Praetorium, gathered the whole cohort before Him.
And having stripped Him, they put a scarlet robe around Him.
And having twisted together a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a reed in His right hand; and having bowed the knees before Him, they mocked Him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
And having spit upon Him, they took the reed and kept striking Him on His head.
And when they had mocked Him, they took off Him the robe, and they put His garments on Him and led away Him to crucify Him.
And going forth, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon. They compelled him that he might carry His cross.
And having come to a place called Golgotha, which is called Place of a Skull,
they gave Him wine to drink, mingled with gall; and having tasted, He was not willing to drink it.
And having crucified Him, they divided His garments, casting lots.
And sitting down, they were guarding Him there.
And they put up over His head the written accusation against Him: this is Jesus, the King of the Jews.
At the same time two robbers are crucified with Him, one at the right hand, and one at the left.
And those passing by kept railing at Him, wagging their heads
and saying, “The One destroying the temple and building it in three days, save Yourself! If You are the Son of God, also descend from the cross!”
Likewise also, the chief priests with the scribes and elders, mocking, were saying,
“He saved others. He is not able to save Himself. He is King of Israel! Let Him descend now from the cross, and we will believe in Him.
He trusted on God. Let Him deliver Him now if He wants. For He said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
And likewise even the robbers, those having been crucified with Him, were upbraiding Him.
And from the sixth hour, darkness was over all the land, until the ninth hour.
And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried out in a loud voice, saying, “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” That is, “My God, My God, why have you forsaken Me?”
And some of those who were standing there, having heard, began saying, “This man calls Elijah.”
And immediately one of them, having run and having taken a sponge, and having filled it with vinegar and having put it on a reed, gave Him to drink.
And the rest were saying, “Let it be. Let us see whether Elijah comes to save Him.”
And Jesus, having cried again in a loud voice, yielded up His spirit.
And behold, the veil of the temple was torn into two from top to bottom. And the earth was shaken, and the rocks were split.
And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints having fallen asleep arose.
And having gone forth out of the tombs after His resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
And the centurion and those with him keeping guard over Jesus, having seen the earthquake and the things taking place, feared greatly, saying, “Truly this was God’s Son.”
And many women were there, looking on from afar off, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to Him—
among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
And evening having arrived, a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph came, who himself also was discipled to Jesus.
Having gone to Pilate, he asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded it to be given up.
And Joseph having taken the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth
and placed it in his new tomb, which he had cut in the rock. And having rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, he went away.
And Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.
And the next day, which is after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together before Pilate,
saying, “Sir, we have remembered how that deceiver, while living, said, ‘After three days I arise.’
Therefore command the tomb to be secured until the third day, lest ever His disciples having come, steal Him away and say to the people, ‘He is risen from the dead.’ And the last deception will be worse than the first.”
Pilate said to them, “You have a guard. Go make it as secure as you know how.”
And having gone with the guard, they made the tomb secure, having sealed the stone.
And after the Sabbaths, it being dawn toward the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, having descended out of heaven and having come, rolled away the stone and was sitting upon it.
And his appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow.
And those keeping guard trembled from fear of him, and they became as dead men.
And the angel answering said to the women, “Fear not; for I know that you seek Jesus, the One having been crucified.
He is not here, for He is risen as He said! Come, see the place where He was lying.
And having gone quickly, say to His disciples that He is risen from the dead and behold, He goes before you into Galilee; you will see Him there. Behold, I have told you.”
And having gone out quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, they ran to tell His disciples.
And behold, Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” And having approached, they took hold of His feet and worshiped Him.
Then Jesus says to them, “Do not fear. Go, tell My brothers, so that they should go into Galilee, and there will they see Me.”
And while they were going, behold, some of the guard, having gone into the city, reported to the chief priests all the things having been done.
And having been gathered together with the elders, and having taken counsel, they gave many silver pieces to the soldiers,
saying, “Say that His disciples, having come by night, stole Him—we being asleep.
And if this is heard by the governor, we will persuade him and will keep you out of trouble.”
And having taken the money, they did as they were instructed. And this report is spread abroad among the Jews until the present day.
And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus assigned them.
And having seen Him they worshiped; but some doubted.
And having come to them, Jesus spoke to them, saying, “All authority in heaven and on the earth has been given to Me.
Therefore having gone, disciple all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all things, whatever I commanded you. And behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age.”
The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, Son of God.
As it has been written in the prophet Isaiah: “Behold, I send My messenger before Your face, who will prepare Your way.”
“The voice of one crying in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight His paths.’”
John came baptizing in the wilderness and proclaiming a baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins.
And all the region of Judea and all of Jerusalem were going out to him and were being baptized by him in the Jordan river, confessing their sins.
And John was clothed in camel’s hair and a belt of leather around his waist; and he is eating locusts and wild honey.
And he was preaching, saying, “He who comes after me is mightier than I, of whom I am not sufficient, having stooped down, to untie the strap of His sandals.
I baptized you with water, but He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
And immediately going up from the water, he saw the heavens tearing open and the Spirit descending as a dove upon Him.
And a voice came out of the heavens: “You are My Son, the beloved; in You I am well pleased.”
And immediately the Spirit drives Him out into the wilderness.
And He was in the wilderness forty days, being tempted by Satan. And He was with the wild animals, and the angels were ministering to Him.
And after the delivering up of John, Jesus came into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God
and saying, “The time has been fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has drawn near; repent and believe in the gospel.”
And passing by the Sea of Galilee, He saw Simon and Andrew, the brother of Simon, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
And Jesus said to them, “Come after Me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.”
And immediately, having left the nets, they followed Him.
And having gone on a little, He saw James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, and they were in the boat mending the nets.
And immediately He called them, and having left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, they went away after Him.
And they go into Capernaum; and immediately on the Sabbaths, having entered into the synagogue, He was teaching.
And they were astonished at His teaching, for He was teaching them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
And immediately there was a man in their synagogue with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
saying, “What to us and to You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come to destroy us? I know who You are, the Holy One of God!”
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent, and come forth out of him!”
And having thrown him into convulsions, and having cried in a loud voice, the unclean spirit came forth out of him.
And all were astonished, so as to question among themselves, saying, “What is this new teaching? With authority He commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey Him!”
And news of Him immediately went out everywhere into all the surrounding region of Galilee.
And immediately having gone forth out of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
And the mother-in-law of Simon was laying sick fevering. And immediately they speak to Him about her.
And having come to her, He raised her up, having taken hold of the hand. And the fever left her, and she began to minister to them.
And evening having come, when the sun went down, they began bringing to Him all those being sick and those being possessed by demons.
And all the city was gathered together at the door.
And He healed many being sick of various diseases, and He cast out many demons. And He would not allow the demons to speak, because they knew Him.
And having risen up very early, still much in night, He went out and departed into a solitary place, and there He was praying.
And Simon and those with him went after Him.
And having found Him, also they say to Him, “Everyone seeks You!”
And He says to them, “Let us go another way into the neighboring towns, so that I might preach there also; for I have come forth for this.”
And He was going in all Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and casting out demons.
And a leper comes to Him, imploring Him and kneeling down to Him, and saying to Him, “If You are willing, You are able to cleanse me.”
And having been moved with compassion, having stretched out His hand, He touched him and says to him, “I am willing, be cleansed.”
And immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
And having sternly warned him, He sent him away immediately.
And He says to him, “See that you speak nothing to anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”
But having gone out, he began to proclaim much and to spread abroad the matter, so that He was no longer able to enter openly into the city, but He was out in solitary places. And they were coming to Him from every quarter.
And He having entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was heard that He is in the house.
And many were gathered together, so as to have no more space, not even at the door. And He was speaking the word to them.
And they come, bringing to Him a paralytic, being carried by four.
And not being able to come near to Him on account of the crowd, they removed the roof where He was, and having broken it up, they let down the pallet on which the paralytic was lying.
And Jesus, having seen their faith, says to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven.”
And some of the scribes were sitting there and reasoning in their hearts,
“Why does this man speak thus? He blasphemes! Who is able to forgive sins, except God alone?”
And immediately Jesus, having known in His spirit that they are reasoning thus within themselves, says to them, “Why do you reason these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Arise, and take up your mat, and walk’?
But that you might know that the Son of Man has authority to forgive sins on the earth...” He says to the paralytic,
“I say to you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your home.”
And he arose, and immediately, having taken up the mat, he went forth before all, so as for all to be amazed and to glorify God, saying, “Never did we see thus.”
And He went forth again beside the sea, and all the crowd was coming to Him, and He taught them.
And passing on, He saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax booth, and says to him, “Follow Me.” And having arisen, he followed Him.
And it came to pass in His reclining in his house, that many tax collectors and sinners were reclining with Jesus and His disciples; for there were many, and they were following Him.
And the scribes of the Pharisees, having seen Him eating with the sinners and tax collectors, were saying to His disciples, “Why does He eat with the tax collectors and sinners?”
And Jesus having heard, says to them, “Those being strong have no need of a physician, but those being sick. I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
And the disciples of John and the Pharisees were fasting. And they come and say to Him, “Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not fast?”
And Jesus said to them, “Are the sons of the bridechamber able to fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long a time as they have the bridegroom with them, they are not able to fast.
But the days will come when the bridegroom will have been taken away from them, and then they will fast in those days.
No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on old clothing. Otherwise the patch tears away from it, the new from the old, and a worse tear takes place.
And no one puts new wine into old wineskins; otherwise the wine will burst the wineskins, and the wine will be destroyed—and the wineskins. Instead, new wine is poured into new wineskins.”
And it came to pass, He is passing through the grainfields on the Sabbaths, and His disciples began to make their way, plucking the heads of grain.
And the Pharisees were saying to Him, “Behold, why do they that which is unlawful on the Sabbaths?”
And He said to them, “Did you never read what David did when he had need, and he and those with him hungered—
how he entered into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the loaves of the presentation, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests—and he even gave to those being with him?”
And He said to them, “The Sabbath was made on account of the man, and not the man on account of the Sabbath.
So then, the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
And He entered into the synagogue again, and a man having a withered hand was there.
And they were watching Him, whether He will heal him on the Sabbaths, in order that they might accuse Him.
And He says to the man having the withered hand, “Arise into the midst.”
And He says to them, “Is it lawful on the Sabbaths to do good, or to do evil, to save life, or to kill?” But they were silent.
And having looked around on them with anger, being grieved at the hardness of their heart, He says to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
And the Pharisees having gone out, immediately began to take counsel with the Herodians against Him, how they might destroy Him.
And Jesus withdrew with His disciples to the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed, and from Judea,
and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and beyond the Jordan, and around Tyre and Sidon. A great multitude came to Him, having heard how much He was doing.
And He spoke to His disciples, that a boat might wait upon Him, on account of the crowd, that they might not press upon Him.
For He healed many, so as for as many as had diseases to press upon Him, that they might touch Him.
And the unclean spirits, whenever they beheld Him, were falling down before Him and crying out, saying, “You are the Son of God.”
And He would rebuke them much, so that they should not make Him known.
And He goes up on the mountain and calls near those whom He Himself wanted, and they went to Him.
And He appointed twelve ones, and He called them apostles, that they might be with Him, and that He might send them to preach,
and to have authority to cast out demons.
And He appointed the Twelve; and to Simon He added the name Peter;
and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, and He added to them the name Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder;
and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Zealot,
and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.
And He comes to a house, and a crowd comes together again, so that not even are they able to eat bread.
And those belonging to Him having heard, went out to seize Him; for they were saying, “He is out of His mind.”
And the scribes, those having come down from Jerusalem, were saying, “He has Beelzebul,” and “By the prince of the demons He casts out the demons.”
And having called them to Him, He began speaking to them in parables: “How is Satan able to cast out Satan?
And if a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom is not able to stand.
And if a house is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.
And if Satan has risen up against himself and has been divided, he is not able to stand, but is coming to an end.
But no one is able, having entered into the house of the strong man, to plunder his goods, unless first he binds the strong man. And then he will plunder his house.
Truly I say to you that all sins and blasphemies will be forgiven the sons of men, as many as they shall have blasphemed.
But whoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit does not have forgiveness, to the age, but is guilty of eternal sin.”
For they were saying, “He has an unclean spirit.”
And His mother and His brothers arrive, and standing outside, sent to Him, calling Him.
And a crowd was sitting around Him, and they said to Him, “Behold, Your mother and Your brothers outside are seeking You.”
And He answering them says, “Who are My mother and My brothers?”
And having looked around on those who were sitting around Him in a circle, He says, “Behold, My mother and My brothers!
For whoever shall do the will of God, he is My brother and sister and mother.”
And again He began to teach beside the sea. And a great crowd was gathered together to Him, so that He, having entered into a boat, sat in the sea, and all the crowd was on the land, close to the sea.
And He began teaching them many things in parables, and in His teaching He was saying to them,
“Listen! Behold, the one sowing went out to sow.
And it came to pass as he sowed, some fell along the road, and the birds came and devoured it.
And other fell upon the rocky place where it had not much soil, and it sprang up immediately, because of not having depth of soil.
And after the sun rose, it was scorched, and because of not having root, it withered away.
And other fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
And other fell into the good soil and began yielding fruit, growing up and increasing, and one bearing thirtyfold, and one sixty, and one a hundred.”
And He was saying, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
And when He was alone, those around Him with the Twelve began asking Him about the parable.
And He was saying to them, “To you has been given the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside, everything is done in parables,
so that, ‘Seeing, they might see and not perceive; and hearing, they might hear and not understand; lest ever they should turn, and they should be forgiven.’”
And He says to them, “Do you not understand this parable? Then how will you understand all the parables?
The one sowing sows the word.
And these are those along the road, where the word is sown; and when they hear, immediately Satan comes and takes away the word having been sown in them.
And these are likewise those sown upon the rocky places, who when they hear the word, immediately receive it with joy,
and they have no root in themselves, but are temporary. Then tribulation or persecution having arisen on account of the word, immediately they fall away.
And these are those sown among the thorns. These are those having heard the word,
and the cares of this age and the deceit of riches, and the desires of the other things entering in, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
And these are those having been sown upon the good soil, such as hear the word and receive it, and bring forth fruit: one thirtyfold, and one sixty, and one a hundred.”
And He was saying to them, “The lamp is not brought in so that it might be put under the basket, or under the bed. Is it not that it might be put upon the lampstand?
For there is nothing which is hidden except that it should be made manifest; nor has taken place a secret thing, but that it should come to light.
If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
And He was saying to them, “Take heed what you hear. With what measure you measure it will be measured to you, and more will be added to you.
For whoever may have, it will be given to him; and he who does not have, even that which he has will be taken away from him.”
And He was saying, “The kingdom of God is thus, as a man should cast the seed upon the earth,
and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should sprout and grow—he not knows how.
Of itself, the earth brings forth fruit—first a plant, then an ear, then full grain in the ear.
And when the fruit offers itself, he sends the sickle immediately, for the harvest has come.”
And He was saying, “To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? Or with what parable shall we present it?
As a grain of mustard, which, when it has been sown upon the earth, is smallest of all the seeds that are upon the earth,
and when it has been sown, it grows up, and becomes greater than all the garden plants, and produces great branches, so that the birds of the air are able to encamp under its shadow.”
And with many such parables He kept speaking the word to them, as they were able to hear,
and He would not speak to them without parables; but privately He would explain all things to His own disciples.
And on that day, evening having come, He says to them, “Let us pass over to the other side.”
And having dismissed the crowd, they take Him with them since He was in the boat; and other boats were with Him.
And a violent storm of wind comes, and the waves were breaking over the boat, so that the boat already is being filled up.
And He was in the stern, sleeping on the cushion. And they awaken Him and say to Him, “Teacher, is it no concern to You that we perish?”
And having been awoken, He rebuked the wind and said to the sea, “Silence, be still!” And the wind abated, and there was a great calm.
And He said to them, “Why are you fearful? Have you still no faith?”
And they feared with great fear and were saying to each other, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey Him?”
And they came to the other side of the sea, to the region of the Gerasenes.
And of Him having gone forth out of the boat, immediately out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit met Him,
who had the dwelling in the tombs. And no longer was anyone able to bind him, not even with chains,
because he often had been bound with shackles and chains, and the chains had been torn in two by him, and the shackles had been shattered, and no one was able to subdue him.
And constantly all night and day in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out and cutting himself with stones.
And having seen Jesus from afar, he ran and fell on his knees before Him.
And having cried in a loud voice, he said, “What to me and to You, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure You by God, do not torment me.”
For He was saying to him, “You come forth out of the man, unclean spirit!”
And He was asking him, “What is your name?” And he answered saying, “My name is Legion, because we are many.”
And he begged Him numerous times that He would not send them out of the country.
Now there was a great herd of pigs there near the mountain, feeding.
And they begged Him, saying, “Send us into the pigs, so that we may enter into them.”
And He allowed them. And the unclean spirits having gone out, entered into the pigs, and the herd—about two thousand—rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea.
And those feeding them fled and proclaimed it to the city and to the country. And they went out to see what it is that has been done.
And they come to Jesus and see the man possessed by demons sitting, clothed and sound minded—the one having had the legion—and they were afraid.
And those having seen it related to them how it happened to the one being possessed by demons, and concerning the pigs.
And they began to implore Him to depart from their region.
And He having entered into the boat, the one having been possessed by demons was begging Him that he might be with Him.
And He did not permit him, but He says to him, “Go to your home, to your own, and preach to them how much the Lord did for you and had mercy on you.”
And he departed and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him; and all were marveling.
And Jesus having passed over again in the boat to the other side, a great crowd was gathered to Him, and He was beside the sea.
And one of the synagogue rulers comes, named Jairus, and having seen Him, falls at His feet,
and he begs Him much, saying, “My little daughter is holding at the end, that having come, You would lay the hands on her, so that she might be cured, and she shall live.”
And He departed with him. And a great crowd was following Him and pressing in on Him.
And a woman, being with a flux of blood twelve years,
and having suffered much under many physicians and having spent everything of hers, and having benefited in no way, but rather to the worse having come,
having heard concerning Jesus, having come up in the crowd behind, she touched His clothing.
For she was saying, “If I shall touch even His garments, I will be healed.”
And immediately her flow of blood was dried up, and she knew in the body that she was healed from the affliction.
And immediately Jesus, having known in Himself the power having gone forth out of Him, having turned in the crowd, said, “Who touched My garments?”
And His disciples were saying to Him, “You see the crowd pressing in on You, and You say, ‘Who touched Me?’”
And He was looking around to see the one having done this.
And the woman, having been frightened and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before Him, and told Him the whole truth.
And He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has healed you; go in peace and be sound from your affliction.”
While yet He is speaking, they come from the ruler of the synagogue’s house, saying, “Your daughter is dead; why do you trouble the Teacher still?”
But Jesus, having heard the word spoken, says to the ruler of the synagogue, “Do not fear; only believe.”
And He did not allow anyone to follow with Him, except Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.
And they come to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and He beholds a commotion, and much weeping and wailing.
And having entered, He says to them, “Why do you make a commotion and weep? The child is not dead, but sleeps.”
And they were laughing at Him. And He, having put all outside, takes with Him the father and the mother of the child, and those with Him, and enters in where the child was.
And having taken the hand of the child, He says to her, “Talitha, koum!” which is translated, “Little girl, I say to you, arise!”
And immediately the girl arose and began walking, for she was twelve of years. And immediately they were overcome with great amazement.
And He instructed them strictly that no one should know this; and He commanded to be given to her to eat.
And He went out from there and came into His hometown; and His disciples follow Him.
And the Sabbath having come, He began to teach in the synagogue; and many hearing were astonished, saying, “From where to this man are these things, and what is the wisdom having been given to Him, even the miracles such as are done by His hands?
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James and Joseph and Judas and Simon? And are not His sisters here with us?” And they took offense at Him.
And Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in his hometown, and among his relatives, and in his household.”
And He was not able to do any work of power there, except having laid the hands on a few sick, He healed them.
And He was amazed because of their unbelief. And He was going around the villages, teaching.
And He calls to Him the Twelve, and He began to send them forth two by two, and He gave to them authority over the unclean spirits.
And He instructed them that they should take nothing for the journey, except only a staff—no bread, nor bag, nor money in the belt—
but wearing sandals, and do not put on two tunics.
And He would say to them, “Wherever you enter into a house, remain there until you go out from there.
And if any place will not receive you nor hear you, departing from there, shake off the dust which is under your feet, for a testimony against them.”
And having gone out, they preached that they should repent.
And they were casting out many demons, and were anointing many sick with oil, and healing them.
And King Herod heard; for His name became well known. And people were saying, “John, the one baptizing, is risen out from the dead, and because of this the miraculous powers operate in him.”
But others were saying, “He is Elijah,” and others were saying, “A prophet, like one of the prophets.”
And Herod having heard, was saying, “John, whom I beheaded—he is risen!”
For Herod himself, having sent, seized John, and bound him in prison, on account of Herodias, the wife of Philip his brother, because he had married her.
For John had been saying to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”
And Herodias held it against him, and wished to kill him, and was not able.
For Herod was afraid of John, knowing him a righteous and holy man; and he kept him safe. And having heard him, he was greatly perplexed, and heard him gladly.
And an opportune day having come, when Herod on his birthday made a banquet to his great men, and to the chief captains, and to the leading men of Galilee,
and the daughter of Herodias herself having come in, and having danced, pleased Herod and those reclining with him. And the king said the to the girl, “Ask me whatever you wish, and I will give to you.”
And he swore to her, “Whatever you might ask me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom.”
And she having gone out, said to her mother, “What shall I ask?” And she said, “The head of John the one baptizing.”
And having entered immediately with haste to the king, she asked, saying, “I desire that you give to me the head of John the Baptist upon a platter at once.”
And the king, having been made very sorrowful, on account of the oaths and those reclining with him, did not want to refuse her.
And immediately the king, having sent an executioner, commanded to be brought his head. And having gone, he beheaded him in the prison,
and brought his head upon a platter, and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
And his disciples having heard it, came and took up his body, and laid it in a tomb.
And the apostles are gathered together to Jesus, and they related to him all things, what they had done and what they had taught.
And He said to them, “You yourselves come apart to a solitary place, and rest a little.” For those coming and those going were many, and not even did they have opportunity to eat.
And they went away by the boat into a solitary place by themselves.
And many saw them going, and recognized, and ran together there on foot from all the cities, and went before them.
And having gone out, He saw a great crowd and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were like sheep not having a shepherd. And He began to teach them many things.
And the hour already being late, having come to Him, his disciples were saying, “The place is desolate, and the hour already is late.
Dismiss them, that having gone to the surrounding region and villages, they might buy for themselves something to eat.”
But answering, He said to them, “You give to them to eat.” And they say to Him, “Having gone, shall we buy two hundred denarii of bread and give them to eat?”
And He says to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go, see.” And having known, they say, “Five, and two fish.”
And He commanded them to make them all recline, groups by groups, on the green grass.
And they sat down groups by groups, by hundreds and by fifties.
And having taken the five loaves and the two fish, having looked up to the heaven, He blessed and broke the loaves, and He kept giving them to His disciples, that they might set before them. And He divided the two fish among all.
And all ate and were satisfied.
And they took up twelve hand-baskets full of fragments, and also of the fish.
And those having eaten of the loaves were five thousand men.
And immediately He compelled His disciples to enter into the boat and to go before Him to the other side, to Bethsaida, until He should dismiss the crowd.
And having taken leave of them, He departed into the mountain to pray.
And evening having come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and He alone upon the land.
And He having seen them straining in the rowing—for the wind was contrary to them—about the fourth watch of the night, He comes to them, walking on the sea, and He was wishing to pass by them.
And having seen Him walking on the sea, they thought that it is a ghost, and cried out.
For all saw Him and were troubled. And immediately He spoke with them, and says to them, “Take courage; I am He; fear not.”
And He went up to them into the boat, and the wind ceased. And exceedingly in abundance they were amazed in themselves,
for they had not understood about the loaves, but their heart had been hardened.
And having passed over, they came to the land, to Gennesaret, and drew to shore.
And of them having come out of the boat, having recognized Him immediately,
they ran through all that country, and they began to carry about on mats those being sick to wherever they were hearing that He is.
And wherever He entered into villages or into cities or into fields, they were laying the ailing in the marketplaces and were begging Him that only they might touch the fringe His clothing; and as many as touched Him were being healed.
And the Pharisees and some of the scribes, having come from Jerusalem, are gathered together to Him.
And they had seen that some of His disciples are eating the bread with defiled, that is, unwashed hands.
For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash the hands carefully, holding the tradition of the elders;
and on coming from the market, they do not eat unless they wash; and there are many other things which they received, for them to hold to—washings of cups and vessels and utensils and couches for dining.
And the Pharisees and the scribes questioned Him, “Why do Your disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat the bread with unwashed hands?”
And He said to them, “Isaiah prophesied rightly concerning you hypocrites, as it has been written: ‘This people honors Me with the lips, but their heart is kept far away from Me;
and they worship Me in vain, teaching as doctrines the precepts of men.’
Having neglected the commandment of God, you hold to the tradition of men.”
And He was saying to them, “Neatly do you set aside the commandment of God, that you might keep your tradition.
For Moses said, ‘Honor your Father and your mother,’ and, ‘The one speaking evil of father or mother must surely die.’
But you say that if a man says to the father or the mother, ‘Whatever you might be profited from me, it is Corban,’ that is, a gift,
no longer do you permit him to do anything for the father or the mother,
making void the word of God for your tradition, which you have handed down. And you do many things like such.”
And having summoned the crowd again, He was saying to them, “Listen to Me, all, and understand:
There is nothing from outside the man entering into him which is able to defile him; but the things proceeding out of the man are the things defiling the man.”

And when He went into the house from the crowd, His disciples were asking Him the parable.
And He says to them, “Thus are you also without understanding? Do you not understand that everything entering into the man from outside is not able to defile him,
because it does not enter into his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the sewer?” (Thus purifying all foods.)
And He was saying, “That going forth out of the man, that defiles the man.
For from within the heart of men go forth evil thoughts, sexual immorality, thefts, murders, adulteries,
covetous desires, wickednesses, deceit, sensuality, an evil eye, slander, pride, foolishness.
All these evils go forth from within, and they defile the man.”
And from there having risen up, He went away into the region of Tyre. And having entered into a house, He was wishing no one to know it, but He was not able to be hidden.
But immediately, having heard about Him, a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having come, fell at His feet.
Now the woman was Gentile, Syrophoenician by race, and kept asking Him that He should cast forth the demon out of her daughter.
And He was saying to her, “Permit the children to be satisfied first; for it is not good to take the children’s bread and to cast it to the dogs.”
But she answered and says to Him, “Yes, Lord, even the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs.”
And He said to her, “Because of this word, go; the demon has gone forth out of your daughter.”
And having gone away to her home, she found the child lying on the bed, and the demon having gone out.
And again having departed from the region of Tyre, He came through Sidon, to the Sea of Galilee, through the midst of the region of the Decapolis.
And they bring to Him a man who was deaf and who spoke with difficulty, and they implore Him that He might lay the hand on him.
And having taken him away from the crowd privately, He put His fingers to his ears, and having spit, He touched his tongue,
and having looked up to heaven He sighed deeply, and He says to him, “Ephphatha!” (that is, “Be opened!”).
And immediately his ears were opened, and the band of his tongue was loosed, and he began speaking plainly.
And He instructed them that they should tell no one. But as much as He kept instructing them, they were proclaiming it more abundantly.
And they were astonished above measure, saying, “He has done all things well. He makes both the deaf to hear and the mute to speak.”
In those days, of the crowd again being great and not having what they might eat, having summoned the disciples, He says to them,
“I am moved with compassion upon the crowd, because they continue with Me three days already, and have nothing that they might eat.
And if I shall send them away hungry to their homes, they will faint on the way. For some of them are come from afar.”
And His disciples answered Him, “From where will anyone be able to satisfy these with bread, here in this desolate place?”
And He was asking them, “How many loaves do you have?” And they said, “Seven.”
And He directs the crowd to recline on the ground. And having taken the seven loaves, having given thanks, He broke them and kept giving them to His disciples, that they might set before them. And they set it before the crowd.
And they had a few small fish. And having blessed them, He ordered these also to be set before them.
And they ate and were satisfied. And they took up seven baskets of fragments over and above.
And there were about four thousand. And He sent them away.
And immediately having entered into the boat with His disciples, He came into the district of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees went out and began to dispute with Him, seeking from Him a sign from heaven, testing Him.
And having sighed deeply in His spirit, He says, “Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I say to you, no sign will be given to this generation.”
And having left them, having embarked again, He went away to the other side.
And they forgot to take loaves, and except one loaf, they did not have any with them in the boat.
And He was instructing them, saying, “Watch out! Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
And they were reasoning with one another because they had no loaves.
And having known, He says to them, “Why do you reason because you have no loaves? Do you not yet perceive nor understand? Do you have your heart hardened?
‘Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear?’ And do you not remember?
When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many hand-baskets full of fragments did you take up?” They say to Him, “Twelve.”
“And when the seven were to the four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did you take up?” And they said, “Seven.”
And He was saying to them, “Do you not yet understand?”
And they come to Bethsaida. And they bring to Him a blind man and implore Him that He might touch him.
And having taken hold of the hand of the blind man, He led him forth out of the village, and having spit upon his eyes, having laid the hands upon him, He was asking him if you see anything.
And having looked up, he was saying, “I see the men, for I see them as trees walking.”
Then He laid the hands upon his eyes again, and he opened his eyes and was restored, and he began to see everything clearly.
And He sent him to his home, saying, “You may not enter into the village.”
And Jesus and His disciples went forth into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way, He was questioning His disciples, saying to them, “Whom do men pronounce Me to be?”
And they answered Him, saying, “John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, one of the prophets.”
And He was questioning them, “But whom do you pronounce Me to be?” Peter answering, says to Him, “You are the Christ.”
And He warned them that they should tell no one concerning Him.
And He began to teach them that it is necessary for the Son of Man to suffer many things, and to be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes, and to be killed, and after three days to rise again.
And He was speaking openly the word. And Peter having taken Him to him, began to rebuke Him.
And having turned and having looked upon His disciples, He rebuked Peter, and said, “Get behind Me, Satan, for your thoughts are not of the things of God, but the things of men.”
And having summoned the crowd with His disciples, He said to them, “If anyone desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross, and let him follow Me.
For whoever might desire to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life on account of Me and of the gospel, he will save it.
For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and to lose his soul?
For what shall a man give as an exchange for his soul?
For whoever may be ashamed of Me and My words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him when He shall come in the glory of His Father, with the holy angels.”
And He was saying to them, “Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who shall not taste of death until they see the kingdom of God having come with power.”
And after six days, Jesus takes with Him Peter and James and John, and brings them up into a high mountain by themselves alone. And He was transfigured before them,
and His garments became exceedingly shining white, such as no launderer on the earth is able thus to whiten.
And Elijah appeared to them with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.
And Peter answering, says to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. And let us make three tabernacles: one for You, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
For he did not know what he should say; for they were terrified.
And there came a cloud overshadowing them, and there came a voice out of the cloud: “This is My Son, the beloved; listen to Him.”
And suddenly, having looked around, no longer did they see anyone with them, except Jesus alone.
And as they were descending from the mountain, He instructed them that they should tell to no one what they had seen, except until the Son of Man had risen out from the dead.
And they kept that saying among themselves, questioning what it is to rise out from the dead.
And they were asking Him, saying, “The scribes say that it behooves Elijah to come first.”
And He was saying to them, “Elijah indeed, having come first, restores all things; and how has it been written of the Son of Man, that He should suffer many things and be set at naught?
But I say to you, that also Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they desired, as it has been written of him.”
And having come to the disciples, they saw a great crowd around them, and scribes arguing with them.
And immediately the whole crowd, having seen Him, were greatly amazed, and running to Him, were greeting Him.
And He asked them, “What are you disputing with them?”
And one out of the crowd answered Him, “Teacher, I brought to You my son, having a mute spirit;
and whenever it seizes him, it throws him down; and he foams and gnashes his teeth, and is withering away. And I spoke to Your disciples, that they might cast it out, and they had no power.”
And answering him He says, “O unbelieving generation! Until when will I be with you? Until when will I bear with you? Bring him to Me.”
And they brought him to Him. And having seen Him, the spirit immediately threw him into convulsions, and having fallen upon the ground, he began rolling around, foaming.
And He asked his father, “How long a time is it that this has been with him?” And he said, “From childhood.
And often it casts him both into fire and into waters, that it might destroy him. But if You are able to do anything, having compassion on us, help us.”
And Jesus said to him, “If You are able? All things are possible to the one believing.”
Immediately the father of the child, having cried out, was saying, “I believe; help my unbelief!”
And Jesus, having seen that a crowd was running together, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, “Mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and you may enter into him no more.”
And it came out, having cried out and having thrown him into many convulsions; and he became as if dead, in order for many to say that he was dead.
And Jesus, having taken him by the hand, raised him up, and he arose.
And He having entered into the house, His disciples were asking Him in private, “Why were we not able to cast it out?”
And He said to them, “This kind is able to go out by nothing except by prayer.”
Having gone forth from there, they were passing through Galilee; and He did not want that anyone should know,
for He was teaching His disciples. And He was saying to them, “The Son of Man is delivered into the hands of men, and they will kill Him; and having been killed, on the third day He will arise.”
And they did not understand the saying, and they were afraid to ask Him.
And they came to Capernaum. And having been in the house, He was asking them, “What were you discussing on the way?”
And they were silent, for along the road they had been discussing with one another which was greatest.
And having sat down, He called the Twelve, and He says to them, “If anyone desires to be first, he will be last of all and servant of all.”
And having taken a child, He set it in the midst of them; and having taken it in His arms, He said to them,
“Whoever shall receive one of such little children in My name, receives Me; and whoever shall receive Me, does not receive Me, but the One having sent Me.”
John answered Him, “Teacher, we saw someone who does not follow us casting out demons in Your name, and we were forbidding him, because he was not following us.”
And Jesus said, “Do not forbid him. For there is no one who will do a work of power in My name, and will be able readily to speak evil of Me.
For whoever is not against us is for us.
For whoever might give you to drink a cup of water because you are Christ’s in name, truly I say to you, that he shall certainly not lose his reward.
And whoever might cause to stumble one of these little ones believing in Me, it is better for him rather if a heavy millstone is put around his neck, and he has been cast into the sea.
And if your hand should cause you to stumble, cut it off; it is better for you to enter into life crippled, than having two hands to go away into Gehenna, into the unquenchable fire.

And if your foot should cause you to stumble, cut it off; it is better for you to enter into life lame, than having the two feet, to be cast into Gehenna.

And if your eye should cause you to stumble, cast it out; it is better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into Gehenna,
where ‘their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.’
For everyone will be salted with fire.
The salt is good, but if the salt becomes unsalty, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.”
And from there having risen up, He comes into the region of Judea, and beyond the Jordan. And again crowds come together to Him, and again, as He had been accustomed, He was teaching them.
And the Pharisees, having approached, were demanding of Him if it is lawful for a husband to divorce a wife, testing Him.
And He answering said to them, “What did Moses command you?”
And they said, “Moses permitted to write a roll of divorce, and to send her away.”
But Jesus said to them, “He wrote this commandment for you because of your hardness of heart;
but from the beginning of creation, ‘He made them male and female.’
‘On account of this, a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife,
and the two will be for one flesh.’ Therefore they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate.”
And in the house again, the disciples were asking Him concerning this.
And He says to them, “Whoever shall divorce his wife, and shall marry another, commits adultery against her.
And if a woman, having divorced her husband, should marry another, she commits adultery.”
And they were bringing little children to Him, that He might touch them. But the disciples rebuked them.
And having seen, Jesus was indignant and said to them, “Permit the little children to come to Me; do not hinder them! For to such belongs the kingdom of God.
Truly I say to you, whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a child shall never enter into it.”
And having taken them in arms, He was blessing them, having laid the hands on them.
And going forth on His journey, one having run up and having knelt down to Him, was asking Him, “Good Teacher, what shall I do that I might inherit eternal life?”
And Jesus said to him, “Why do you call Me good? No one is good, except God alone.
You know the commandments: ‘You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not bear false witness, you shall not defraud, you shall honor your father and mother.’”
And he was saying to Him, “Teacher, all these I have kept from my youth.”
And Jesus, having looked upon him, loved him and said to him, “One thing to you is lacking: Go, sell as much as you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow Me.”
And having been sad at the word, he went away grieving; for he was one having many possessions.
And Jesus having looked around, says to His disciples, “How difficultly those having riches will enter into the kingdom of God!”
And the disciples were astonished at His words. But Jesus answering says to them again, “Children, how difficult it is to enter into the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of the needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
And they were exceedingly astonished, saying among themselves, “Then who is able to be saved?”
Having looked on them, Jesus says, “With men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are possible with God.”
Peter began to say to Him, “Behold, we have left all and followed You.”
Jesus was saying, “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or lands for My sake and because of the gospel,
who shall not receive a hundredfold now in this time—houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with persecutions—and in the age which is coming, eternal life.
But many first will be last; and the last, first.”
And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going on before them. And they were astonished, and those following were afraid. And having taken to Him the Twelve again, He began to tell them the things being about to happen to Him:
“Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and to the scribes, and they will condemn Him to death, and will betray Him to the Gentiles.
And they will mock Him, and will spit upon Him, and will flog and will kill Him, and on the third day He will rise again.”
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come up to Him saying to Him, “Teacher, we desire that You would do for us whatever we might ask you.”
And He said to them, “What do you desire Me to do for you?”
And they said to Him, “Grant to us that we might sit, one of us at Your right hand and one at Your left hand, in Your glory.”
And Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?”
And they said to Him, “We are able.” And Jesus said to them, “You will drink the cup that I drink, and you will be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized,
but to sit at My right hand or at My left hand, is not Mine to give, but to those for whom it has been prepared.”
And having heard this, the ten began to be indignant about James and John.
And Jesus having called them near, says to them, “You know that those being accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.
But it shall not be thus among you. Instead, whoever desires to become great among you will be your servant,
and whoever desires to become first among you will be slave of all.
For even the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many.”
And they come to Jericho. And as He was going out from Jericho—and His disciples, and a large crowd—a blind beggar, Bartimaeus, son of Timaeus, was sitting beside the road.
And having heard that it is Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and to say, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.”
And many were rebuking him, that he should be silent; but he kept crying out much more, “Son of David, have mercy on me.”
And Jesus, having stopped, commanded him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying to him, “Take courage! Rise up! He calls you.”
And having cast away his cloak, having risen up, he came to Jesus.
And Jesus answering him says, “What do you desire I should do to you?” And the blind man said to Him, “Rabboni, that I may receive sight.”
And Jesus said to him, “Go, your faith has healed you.” And immediately he received sight and began following Him on the way.
And when they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany near the Mount of Olives, He sends two of His disciples
and says to them, “Go into the village before you, and immediately entering into it, you will find a colt having been tied, upon which no one of men has ever sat; having untied it, also bring it.
And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘Because the Lord has need of it, and He will send it back here soon.’”
And they departed and found the colt having been tied at the door outside, by the street. And they untied it,
and some of those standing there were saying to them, “What are you doing, untying the colt?”
And they spoke to them as Jesus had commanded, and they allowed them.
And they led the colt to Jesus, and they cast upon it their cloaks, and He sat on it.
And many spread their cloaks on the road, and others, branches having been cut down from the fields.
And those going before and those following were crying out: “Hosanna!” “Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord!”
“Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father, David!” “Hosanna in the highest!”
And He entered into Jerusalem, into the temple; and having looked around on all things, the hour being already late, He went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
And on the next day, they having gone out from Bethany, He was hungry.
And having seen a fig tree from afar, having leaves, He went to see if perhaps He will find anything on it. And having come to it, He found nothing except leaves; for it was not the season of figs.
And answering He said to it, “May no one eat the fruit of you, no more to the age.” And His disciples were listening.
And they come to Jerusalem. And having entered into the temple, He began to cast out those selling and those buying in the temple. And He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of those selling doves.
And He would not permit that anyone should carry a vessel through the temple.
And He began teaching, and was saying to them, “Has it not been written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
And the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and they were seeking how they might destroy Him. For they were afraid of Him, for the whole crowd was astonished at His teaching.
And when evening came, they were going forth out of the city.
And passing by in the morning, they saw the fig tree having been dried up from the roots.
And Peter having remembered, says to Him, “Rabbi, look, the fig tree that You cursed is dried up.”
And Jesus answering, says to them, “Have faith from God.
Truly I say to you that whoever shall say to this mountain, ‘Be you taken away and be you cast into the sea,’ and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what he says takes place, it will be done for him.
Because of this I say to you, all things whatever praying, you also ask, believe that you receive, and it will be to you.
And when you may stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive it, so that your Father in the heavens also might forgive you your trespasses.”

And they come again to Jerusalem. And as He is walking in the temple, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders come to Him.
And they were saying to Him, “By what authority are You doing these things? Or who gave You this authority, that You should do these things?”
And Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one thing, and you answer Me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men? Answer Me.”
And they began reasoning with themselves, saying, “What should we say? If we should say, ‘From heaven,’ He will say, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
But should we say, ‘From men’...” They were afraid of the people, for all were holding that John truly was a prophet.
And answering to Jesus, they say, “We do not know.” And Jesus says to them, “Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.”
And He began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard, and placed around it a fence, and dug a wine vat, and built a tower, and rented it out to farmers, and traveled abroad.
And he sent a servant to the farmers at the due time, that he might receive from the farmers from the fruit of the vineyard.
But having taken him, they beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
And again he sent to them another servant, and him they struck on the head, and treated shamefully.
And He sent another, and him they killed; also many others, indeed some beating, and some killing.
Yet having one beloved son, he sent him to them last, saying, ‘They will have respect for my son.’
But those farmers said to themselves, ‘This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
And having taken him, they killed him, and cast him forth outside the vineyard.
What therefore will the master of the vineyard do? He will come and will destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.
Have you not even read this Scripture: ‘The stone which those building rejected, this has become the chief corner;
this was from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
And they were seeking to lay hold of Him, and yet they feared the crowd; for they knew that He had spoken the parable against them. And having left Him, they went away.
And they send some of the Pharisees and Herodians to Him, that they might catch Him in discourse.
And having come, they say to Him, “Teacher, we know that You are true, and to You there is no care about any one; for You do not look on the appearance of men, but teach the way of God on the basis of the truth. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not? Should we pay or not pay?”
And knowing their hypocrisy, He said to them, “Why do you test Me? Bring Me a denarius, that I might see it.”
And they brought it, and He says to them, “Whose likeness and inscription is this?” And they said to Him, “Caesar’s.”
And Jesus said to them, “Give back to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God.” And they were amazed at Him.
And Sadducees, who say there is not a resurrection, come to Him. And they began questioning Him, saying,
“Teacher, Moses wrote for us, that if anyone’s brother should die and leave behind a wife and not leave children, that his brother should take the wife and raise up seed for his brother.
There were seven brothers; and the first took a wife, and dying, left no seed.
And the second took her, and died, not having left seed. And the third likewise.
And the seven left no seed. Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, when they rise, of which of them will she be wife? For the seven had her as wife.”
Jesus was saying to them, “Do you not err because of this, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God?
For when they rise out from the dead, neither do they marry, nor are given in marriage; but they are like angels in the heavens.
And concerning the dead, that they rise, have you not read in the book of Moses on the bush, how God spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
He is not God of the dead, but of the living. You err greatly.”
And one of the scribes having come up, having heard them reasoning together, having seen that He answered them well, questioned Him, “Which commandment is the first of all?”
Jesus answered, “The foremost is, ‘Hear this O Israel: The Lord our God is One Lord,
and you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.’
The second is this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is not another commandment greater than these.”
And the scribe said to Him, “Right, Teacher. You have spoken according to truth that He is One, and there is not another besides Him,
and to love Him with all the heart and with all the understanding and with all the strength, and to love the neighbor as oneself is more important than all the burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
And Jesus, having seen him that he answered wisely, said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And no one dared to question Him any longer.
And answering, Jesus was saying, teaching in the temple, “How do the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David?
David himself said by the Holy Spirit: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand, until I place Your enemies as a footstool of Your feet.”’
David himself calls Him Lord. And from where is He his son?” And the great crowd was listening to Him gladly.
And in His teaching He was saying, “Beware of the scribes, desiring to walk about in robes, and greetings in the marketplaces,
and first seats in the synagogues, and first places at the feasts;
those devouring the houses of widows, and praying at great length as a pretext. These will receive greater judgment.”
And having sat down opposite the treasury, He was watching how the crowd cast money into the treasury; and many rich were casting in much.
And one poor widow having come, cast in two lepta, which is a kodrantes.
And having summoned His disciples, He says to them, “Truly I say to you that this poor widow has cast in more than all of those casting into the treasury.
For all cast in out of that which was abounding to them, but she out of her poverty cast in all, as much as she had of her whole livelihood.”
And of Him going forth out of the temple, one of His disciples says to Him, “Teacher, behold what stones and what buildings!”
And Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone shall be left here upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down.”
And of Him sitting upon the Mount of Olives, opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked Him in private,
“Tell us when these things will be, and what will be the sign when all these things are going to be accomplished?”
And Jesus began to say to them, “Take heed, lest anyone mislead you.
Many will come in My name, saying, ‘I am He,’ and they will mislead many.
And when you shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be disturbed. It must come to pass, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places; there will be famines. These are the beginning of birth pains.
But you take heed to yourselves. They will betray you to courts, and you will be beaten in synagogues; and you will stand before governors and kings because of Me, for a testimony to them.
And the gospel it behooves first to proclaim to all the nations.
But when they might lead you away, delivering you up, do not be anxious beforehand what you should say; but whatever might be given to you in that hour, speak that. For you are not those speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
And brother will deliver up brother to death, and father, child; and children will rise up against parents, and will put them to death.
And you will be hated by all on account of My name; but the one having endured to the end, he will be saved.
And when you see the abomination of the desolation, standing where it should not (the one reading, let him understand), then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains;
and the one upon the housetop, let him not come down nor go in to take anything out of his house;
and the one in the field, let him not return to the things behind to take his clothing.
And woe to those having in womb and to the ones nursing infants in those days!
And pray that it might not be in winter,
for in those days will be tribulation, the like such as never has been from the beginning of creation which God created until now—and never shall be.
And if the Lord had not shortened the days, not any flesh would have been saved; but on account of the elect whom He chose, He has shortened the days.
And then if anyone says to you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ! Behold, there!’ you shall not believe it.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will give signs and wonders so as to deceive, if possible, the elect.
But you take heed; I have foretold to you all things.
But in those days, those after the tribulation, ‘The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
and the stars will be falling out of the heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.’
And then will they see the Son of Man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
And then He will send the angels and will gather together His elect from the four winds, from the end of earth to the end of heaven.
And learn the parable of the fig tree: When its branch already has become tender, and it puts forth leaves, you know that summer is near.
So also you, when you see these things coming to pass, know that He is near, at the doors.
Truly I say to you that this generation will not have passed away until all these things shall have taken place.
The heaven and the earth will pass away, but My words will certainly not pass away.
And concerning that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
Take heed; watch; for you do not know when the time is.
It is like a man going on a journey, having left his house, and having given his servants authority, to each one his work. And he commanded the doorkeeper that he should keep watch.
Therefore watch—for you do not know when the master of the house comes: either at evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or morning—
lest having come suddenly, he should find you sleeping.
And what I say to you, I say to all: Watch!”
And after two days it would be the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread. And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how, having taken Him by stealth, they might kill Him.
For they were saying, “Not during the feast, lest there will be an uproar of the people.”
And of Him being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, of Him having reclined, a woman came having an alabaster flask of fragrant oil of pure nard, of great price. Having broken the alabaster flask, she poured it on His head.
And some were indignant within themselves: “Why has this the waste of the fragrant oil been made?
For this fragrant oil could have been sold for above three hundred denarii, and have been given to the poor.” And they were grumbling at her.
And Jesus said, “Leave her alone; why do you cause trouble to her? She did a good work toward Me.
For the poor you always have with you, and you are able to do them good whenever you desire; but not always do you have Me.
She did what she could. She came beforehand to anoint My body for the burial.
And truly I say to you, wherever the gospel shall be proclaimed in the whole world, what this woman has done also will be spoken of, for a memorial of her.”
And Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went away to the chief priests, that he might betray Him to them.
And having heard, they rejoiced and promised to give him money. And he was seeking how he might deliver Him up conveniently.
And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they were to sacrifice the Passover lamb, His disciples say to Him, “Where do You desire that, having gone, we should prepare that You may eat the Passover?”
And He sends forth two of His disciples and says to them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him.
And wherever he might enter, say to the master of the house that the Teacher says, ‘Where is My guest room, where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?’
And he will show you a large upper room, having been furnished and ready. And prepare for us there.”
And his disciples went away, and came into the city, and found as He had said to them, and they prepared the Passover.
And evening having arrived, He comes with the Twelve.
And as they were reclining and were eating, Jesus said, “Truly I say to you that one of you who is eating with Me will betray Me.”
They began to be grieved and to say to Him one by one, “Surely not I?”
And He said to them, “It is one of the Twelve, the one dipping in the bowl with Me.
For indeed the Son of Man goes as it has been written concerning Him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; it were better for him if that man had not been born.”
And as they were eating, having taken bread, having spoken a blessing, He broke it and gave it to them and said, “Take it; this is My body.”
And having taken the cup, having given thanks, He gave it to them, and they all drank of it.
And He said to them, “This is My blood of the covenant, which is being poured out for many.
Truly I say to you that never will I drink of the fruit of the vine again, until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.”
And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
And Jesus says to them, “You will all fall away, for it has been written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
But after having arisen, I will go before you into Galilee.”
And Peter was saying to Him, “Even if all will fall away, yet I will not.”
And Jesus says to him, “Truly I say to you that now this night, before that the rooster crows twice, you yourself will deny Me three times.”
And he kept saying emphatically, “If it is needful of me to die with You, never will I deny You.” And all of them were saying likewise also.
And they come to a place, the name of which is Gethsemane; and He says to His disciples, “Sit here, while I shall pray.”
And He takes Peter and James and John with Him; and He began to be greatly awe-struck and deeply distressed.
And He says to them, “My soul is very sorrowful, even to death; remain here and watch.”
And having gone forward a little, He fell upon the ground, and was praying that if it is possible, the hour might pass from Him.
And He was saying, “Abba, Father, all things are possible to You; take away this cup from Me; but not what I will, but what You will.”
And He comes and finds them sleeping. And He says to Peter, “Simon are you asleep? Were you not able to watch one hour?
Watch and pray, so that you may not enter into temptation. For the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
And again having gone away, He prayed, having said the same thing.
And again having returned, he found them sleeping. For their the eyes were heavy, and they did not know what they should answer Him.
And He comes the third time and says to them, “Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? It is enough; the hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is delivered up into the hands of the sinful.
Rise, let us go. Behold, the one betraying Me has drawn near!”
And immediately while yet He is speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, comes up, and with Him a crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.
And the one delivering Him up had given to them a sign, saying: “Whomever I shall kiss is He; seize Him and lead Him away securely.”
And having arrived, having come up to Him immediately, he says, “Rabbi!” And he kissed Him.
And they laid hands on Him and seized Him.
And a certain one of those standing by, having drawn the sword, struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his ear.
And Jesus answering said to them, “Are you come out with swords and clubs as against a robber, to capture Me?
Every day I was with you in the temple teaching, and you did not seize Me. But it is that the Scriptures may be fulfilled.”
And all having left Him, fled.
And a certain young man was following Him, having cast a linen cloth about his naked body. And they seize him,
and having left behind the linen cloth, he fled naked.
And they led away Jesus to the high priest. And all the chief priests, and the elders, and the scribes come together.
And Peter followed Him from afar off, as far as to within the court of the high priest; and he was sitting with the officers and warming himself at the fire.
And the chief priests and all the Council were seeking testimony against Jesus to put Him to death, but they were not finding any.
For many were bearing false testimony against Him, but their testimonies were not alike.
And some having risen up, were bearing false testimony against Him, saying,
“We heard Him saying, ‘I will destroy this temple, the one made with hands, and in three days I will build another, not made with hands.’”
And their testimony was thus not alike.
And the high priest having stood up in the midst, questioned Jesus, saying, “Do You not answer? What is it these testify against You?”
But He was silent, and did not answer. Again the high priest was questioning Him, and says to Him, “Are You the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?”
And Jesus said, “I am. And you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
And the high priest, having torn his garments, says, “Why have we need of witnesses?
You heard the blasphemy. What does it appear to you?” And all condemned Him to be deserving of death.
And some began to spit upon Him, and to cover up His face, and to strike Him and to say to Him, “Prophesy!” And the officers struck Him with the palms.
And Peter being below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest comes,
and having seen Peter warming himself, having looked at him, she says, “You also were with the Nazarene, Jesus.”
But he denied it, saying, “I neither know nor even understand what you say.” And he went forth out into the porch; and the rooster crowed.
And the servant girl, having seen him, began to say again to those standing by, “This is one of them.”
But he denied it again. And after a little, again those standing by were saying to Peter, “Truly you are of them, for you also are a Galilean.”
But he began to curse and to swear, “I do not know this man whom you speak of!”
And immediately a rooster crowed for the second time. And Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said to him, “Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny Me three times.” And having broken down, he began to weep.
And early in the morning, having formed a counsel, the chief priests, with the elders and scribes and the whole Council, having bound Jesus, led Him away and delivered Him to Pilate.
And Pilate questioned Him, “Are You the King of the Jews?” And answering, He says to him, “You have said.”
And the chief priests were accusing Him harshly.
And Pilate began to question Him again, saying, “Do You not answer? See how many things they testify against You!”
But Jesus answered no further, so as to amaze Pilate.
And at the feast, he used to release to them one prisoner, whom they requested.
And the one called Barabbas was there, having been bound with the rebels who had committed murder in the insurrection.
And the crowd having cried out, began to beg him to do as usually he did for them.
But Pilate answered them, saying, “Do you wish that I should release to you the King of the Jews?”
For he was aware that the chief priests had delivered Him up because of envy.
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd, that he might release to them Barabbas instead.
And Pilate answering was saying to them again, “Then what do you wish that I should do to Him whom you call the King of the Jews?”
And they cried out again, “Crucify Him!”
And Pilate was saying to them, “Why? What evil did He commit?” But they shouted much more, “Crucify Him!”
And Pilate, desiring to do that which was satisfactory to the crowd, released Barabbas to them. And having flogged Him, he delivered Jesus that He might be crucified.
And the soldiers led Him away into the palace, that is the Praetorium, and they call together the whole cohort.
And they put on Him purple, and having twisted together a crown of thorns, they placed it on Him,
and they began to salute Him, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
And they kept striking His head with a reed and spitting on Him; and bending the knees, they were kneeling down to Him.
And when they had mocked Him, they took off Him the purple and put on Him His own garments. And they are leading Him out, that they might crucify Him.
And they compel one passing by, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, coming from the country, that he might carry His cross.
And they bring Him to a place, Golgotha, which is translated, Place of a Skull.
And they were offering Him wine, having been mixed with gall; but He did not take it.
And having crucified Him, they also divided His garments, casting lots for them, who should take what.
And it was the third hour, and they crucified Him.
And there was the inscription of the accusation against Him, having been written: The King of the Jews.
And with Him they crucify two robbers, one at the right hand, and one at His left.

And those passing by were railing at Him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! The One destroying the temple and building it in three days,
save Yourself, having descended from the cross!”
Likewise also the chief priests, with the scribes, mocking among one another, were saying, “He saved others; He is not able to save Himself.
The Christ, the King of Israel, let Him descend now from the cross, that we might see and believe!” And those being crucified with Him were upbraiding Him.
And the sixth hour having arrived, darkness came over the whole land, until the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?” Which is translated, “My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?”
And some of those standing by, having heard, were saying, “Behold, He calls Elijah.”
And one having run and having filled a sponge with vinegar, having put it on a reed, gave Him to drink, saying, “Let be; let us see if Elijah comes to take Him down.”
But Jesus, having uttered a loud cry, breathed His last.
And the veil of the temple was torn into two from top to bottom.
And the centurion standing opposite of Him, having seen that He breathed His last, thus said, “Truly this man was the Son of God!”
And there were also women looking on from afar off, among whom also were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the least and of Joseph, and Salome,
who had been following Him and had been ministering to Him when He was in Galilee, and many other ones having come up with Him to Jerusalem.
And evening having arrived already, since it was the Preparation, that is, the day before Sabbath,
having come, Joseph from Arimathea, a prominent Council member, who was also himself waiting for the kingdom of God, having boldness, went in to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
And Pilate wondered if already He were dead. And having summoned the centurion, he questioned him whether He had died already.
And having known it from the centurion, He granted the body to Joseph.
And having bought a linen cloth, having taken Him down, he wrapped Him in the linen cloth and laid Him in a tomb which was cut out of a rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of the tomb.
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph were watching where He was laid.
And the Sabbath having passed, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices, that having come, they might anoint Him.
And very early on the first day of the week, they come to the tomb, the sun having arisen.
And they were saying among themselves, “Who will roll away the stone for us from the door of the tomb?”
And having looked up, they see that the stone has been rolled away; for it was extremely large.
And having entered into the tomb, they saw a young man clothed in a white robe, sitting on the right; and they were greatly amazed.
And he says to them, “Do not be amazed. You seek Jesus, the Nazarene, the One having been crucified. He is risen! He is not here! Behold the place where they laid Him.
But go, say to His disciples and to Peter that He goes before you into Galilee; there you will see Him, as He said to you.”
And having gone out, they fled from the tomb, for trembling and amazement had seized them. And they spoke nothing to anyone; for they were afraid.
And having risen early the first day of the week, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom He had cast out seven demons.
She having gone, told it to those having been with Him, mourning and weeping.
And they having heard that He is alive and has been seen by her, disbelieved.
And after these things, He appeared in another form to two of them as they are walking, going into the country.
And they having gone, told it to the rest; neither did they believe them.
And afterward, as they were reclining, He appeared to the eleven and rebuked their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those having seen Him arisen.
And He said to them, “Having gone into all the world, proclaim the gospel to all the creation.
The one having believed and having been baptized will be saved, but the one having disbelieved will be condemned.
And these signs will accompany those having believed: In My name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new tongues;
and with their hands they will take up serpents; and if they drink anything deadly, it shall never hurt them; they will lay hands upon the sick, and they will be well.”
Therefore indeed the Lord Jesus, after speaking to them, was taken up into the heaven and sat at the right hand of God.
And having gone forth, they preached everywhere, the Lord working with them and confirming the word by the accompanying signs.
Inasmuch as many have undertaken to draw up a narration concerning the things having been accomplished among us,
just as those from the beginning having been eyewitnesses and servants of the word delivered them to us,
it seemed good also to me, having been acquainted with all things carefully from the first, to write with method to you, most excellent Theophilus,
so that you may know the certainty concerning the things which you were instructed.
There was in the days of Herod king of Judea a certain priest named Zacharias, of the division of Abijah, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth.
And they were both righteous before God, walking blameless in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.
And to them there was no child, inasmuch as Elizabeth was barren, and both were advanced in their years.
Now it came to pass, in his fulfilling the priestly service before God in the order of his division,
according to the custom of the priesthood, it fell to him by lot to burn incense, having entered into the temple of the Lord.
And the whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of the incense.
And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right of the altar of the incense.
And having seen him, Zechariah was troubled, and fear fell upon him.
And the angel said to him, “Fear not, Zechariah, because your prayer has been heard, and Your wife Elizabeth will bear to you a son, and you shall call his name John.
And he will be joy and gladness to you, and many will rejoice at his birth.
For he will be great before the Lord. And he shall never drink wine and strong drink, and he will be full of the Holy Spirit even from his mother’s womb.
And he will turn many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God.
And he will go forth before Him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.”
And Zechariah said to the angel, “By what will I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in her years.”
And the angel answering, said to him, “I am Gabriel, the one standing before God; and I was sent to speak to you, and to bring these glad tidings to you.
And behold, you will be silent, and not able to speak until that day these things shall take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their season.”
And the people were expecting Zechariah, and they were wondering at his delaying in temple.
And having come out, he was not able to speak to them, and they recognized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he was making signs to them, and remained mute.
And it came to pass, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his home.
And after these days, his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying,
“Thus the Lord has done to me, in the days in which He looked upon me to take away my disgrace among men.”
And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a city of Galilee whose name was Nazareth,
to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the name of the virgin was Mary.
And having come to her, he said, “Greetings, you favored with grace! The Lord is with you.”
And she was troubled at the statement and was pondering what kind this salutation might be.
And the angel said to her, “Fear not, Mary; for you have found favor with God.
And behold, you will conceive in womb, and will bring forth a son, and you shall call His name Jesus.
He will be great, and He will be called Son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give Him the throne of His father David,
and He will reign over the house of Jacob to the ages. And of His kingdom there will be no end!”
And Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I do not know a man?”
And the angel answering, said to her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore also the Holy One being born will be called the Son of God.
And behold your relative Elizabeth, she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month to her who was called barren.
For nothing will be impossible with God.”
And Mary said, “Behold, the Lord’s handmaid. May it happen to me according to your word.” And the angel departed from her.
And in those days Mary, having risen up, went with haste into the hill country, to a town of Judah,
and she entered into the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby in her womb leaped. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit,
and she cried out in a loud voice and said, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit your of womb.
And from where is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For behold, as the voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby in my womb leaped in exultation.
And blessed is the one having believed that there will be a fulfillment to the things spoken to her from the Lord.”
And Mary said: “My soul magnifies the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.
For He has looked upon the humiliation of His handmaiden. For behold, from henceforth all the generations will count me blessed.
For the mighty One has done great things to me. And holy is His name.
And His mercy is to generations and generations, to those fearing Him.
He has shown strength with His arm, He has scattered the proud in the thought of their heart.
He has brought down rulers from thrones, and exalted the humble.
He has filled those hungering with good things, and those being rich He has sent away empty.
He has helped Israel His servant, remembering mercy,
as He spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his to descendants to the age.”
And Mary dwelt with her about three months, and returned to her home.
Now the time was fulfilled to Elizabeth for her to give birth, and she bore a son.
And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord was magnifying His mercy with her, and they were rejoicing with her.
And it came to pass on the eighth day, they came to circumcise the child, and were calling it after the name of his father, Zechariah.
And his mother answering said, “No, but he will be called John.”
And they said to her, “There is no one among your relatives who is called by this name.”
And they were making signs to his father, what he might wish him to be called.
And having asked for a writing tablet, he wrote, saying, “John is his name.” And they all marveled.
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he was speaking, blessing God.
And fear came upon all those dwelling around them. And in all the hill country of Judea all these words were being talked about.
And all those having heard laid them up in their heart, saying, “What then will this child be?” And indeed, the hand of the Lord was with him.
And his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied, saying,
“Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, because He has visited and has performed redemption on His people,
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us, in the house of His servant David;
as He spoke by the mouth of His holy prophets of old,
salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all those hating us,
to fulfill mercy toward our fathers, and to remember His holy covenant,
the oath that He swore to Abraham our father, to grant us,
having been saved from the hand of our enemies, to serve Him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before Him, all the days of our life.
And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High; for you will go before the Lord to prepare His ways,
to give knowledge of salvation to His people, in forgiveness of their sins,
through the affections of compassion of our God, in which the Sunrise will visit us from on high,
to shine upon those sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death, to direct our feet into the way of peace.”
And the child continued to grow and was strengthened in spirit; and he was in the deserted places until the day of his appearance to Israel.
And it came to pass in those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus to register all the world.
This registration first took place when Quirinius was governing Syria.
And all were going to be registered, each to his own city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the town of Nazareth, to Judea, to the City of David, which is called Bethlehem, because of his being of the house and family of David,
to register with Mary the one being betrothed to him, she being with child.
And it came to pass, in their being there, the days of her giving birth were fulfilled.
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and she wrapped Him in swaddling cloths and laid Him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn.
And there were shepherds in the same region, lodging in the fields and keeping watch over their flock by night.
And an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they feared with great fear.
And the angel said to them, “Fear not, for behold, I bring good news to you of great joy, which will be to all the people.
For today in the City of David a Savior has been born to you, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is the sign to you: You will find a baby wrapped in swaddling cloths, and lying in a manger.”
And suddenly there came with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying:
“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men with whom He is pleased!”
And it came to pass, as the angels were departing from them into the heaven, the shepherds were saying to one another, “Let us go through indeed as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this word that has come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us.”
And having hurried, they came and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby, lying in the manger.
And having seen, they proclaimed abroad concerning the saying having been told them concerning this Child.
And all those having heard marveled concerning the things having been spoken to them by the shepherds.
But Mary was treasuring up all these matters, pondering them in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all things which they had heard and seen, as it was said to them.
And when eight days to circumcise Him were fulfilled, then His name was called Jesus, which He had been called by the angel before He was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of their purification were fulfilled according to the Law of Moses, they brought Him to Jerusalem to present to the Lord
(as it has been written in the Law of the Lord: “Every male opening a womb shall be called holy to the Lord”),
and to offer a sacrifice, according to that having been said in the Law of the Lord, “A pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons.”
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. And this man was righteous and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel; and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
And it was divinely revealed to him by the Holy Spirit not to see death before that he should see the Lord’s Christ.
And he came in the Spirit into the temple. And in the time when the parents were bringing in the child Jesus, the thing they were doing for Him according to that having become customary by the Law,
then he received Him into the arms, and blessed God, and said:
“Now Lord, You dismiss Your servant in peace, according to Your word.
For my eyes have seen Your salvation,
which You have prepared before the face of all the peoples,
a light for revelation of the Gentiles, and glory of Your people Israel.”
And His father and mother were marveling at the things having been spoken concerning Him.
And Simeon blessed them and said to His mother Mary: “Behold, this Child is appointed for the falling and rising up of many in Israel, and for a sign spoken against—
and a sword also will go through your own soul— so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”
And there was a prophetess, Anna, daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She, being advanced greatly in years, had lived with a husband seven years from her marriage,
and she was a widow of about eighty-four years, who did not depart the temple, serving with fastings and prayers night and day.
And having come up at that hour, she was giving praise to the Lord and was speaking concerning Him to all those waiting for the redemption of Jerusalem.
And when they had performed everything according to the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their town, Nazareth.
And the Child continued to grow and become strong, being filled with wisdom. And the grace of God was upon Him.
And His parents were going to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
And when He was twelve years old, they having gone up according to the custom of the Feast,
and having completed the days, in their returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem. But His parents did not know.
And having supposed Him to be in their company, they went a day’s journey, and began seeking Him among the relatives and the acquaintances;
and not having found Him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking Him.
And it came to pass after three days, they found Him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them and questioning them.
And all those hearing Him were amazed at His understanding and answers.
And having seen Him, they were astonished, and His mother said to Him, “Child why have You done thus to us? Behold, Your father and I were seeking You, distressing.”
And He said to them, “Why is it that you were seeking Me? Did you not know that it behooves Me to be in the house of My Father?”
And they did not understand the word that He spoke to them.
And He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and He was subject to them. And His mother was treasuring up all these matters in her heart.
And Jesus continued to advance in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.
And in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip being tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and of Trachonitis, and Lysanias being tetrarch of Abilene,
during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came upon John son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
And he went into all the region surrounding the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins,
as it has been written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “The voice of one crying in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of the Lord; make His paths straight.’
Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be made low; and the crooked will become into straight, and the rough ways into smooth.
And all flesh will see the salvation of God.”
So he was saying to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “Offspring of vipers, who forewarned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore produce fruits worthy of repentance. And do not begin to say in yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
And already also the ax is applied to the root of the trees; therefore every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and is thrown into the fire.”
And the crowds were asking him, saying, “What then shall we do?”
And answering, he was saying to them, “The one having two tunics, let him impart to the one having none; and the one having food, let him do likewise.”
And tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, “Teacher, what shall we do?”
And he said to them, “Collect nothing more beyond that having been appointed to you.”
And those being soldiers also were asking him, saying, “And what shall we do?” And he said to them, “Extort no one, nor accuse falsely, and be content with your wages.”
And the people are expecting and all wondering in their hearts concerning John, whether he might be the Christ.
John answered all saying, “I indeed baptize you with water, but the One mightier than I comes, of whom I am not worthy to untie the strap of His sandals; He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire,
of whom the winnowing fork is in His hand to clear His threshing floor, and to gather the wheat into His barn. But He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
Therefore indeed exhorting many other things, he was preaching the good news to the people.
But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him concerning Herodias the wife of his brother, and concerning all the evils that Herod had done,
added this yet to all: He also locked up John in prison.
Now it came to pass, in all the people having been baptized, Jesus also having been baptized and having prayed, the heaven was opened,
and the Holy Spirit descended upon Him in a bodily form as a dove, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are My Son, the beloved; in You I am well pleased.”
And Jesus beginning, was Himself about thirty years old, being son as was supposed, of Joseph, of Heli,
of Matthat, of Levi, of Melchi, of Jannai, of Joseph,
of Mattathias, of Amos, of Nahum, of Esli, of Naggai,
of Maath, of Mattathias, of Semein, of Josech, of Joda,
of Joannen, of Rhesa, of Zerubbabel, of Shealtiel, of Neri,
of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosam, of Elmadam, of Er,
of Joshua, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat, of Levi,
of Simeon, of Judah, of Joseph, of Jonam, of Eliakim,
of Melea, of Menna, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of David,
of Jesse, of Obed, of Boaz, of Sala, of Nahshon,
of Amminadab, of Admin, of Arni, of Hezron, of Perez, of Judah,
of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, of Terah, of Nahor,
of Serug, of Reu, of Peleg, of Eber, of Shelah,
of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Shem, of Noah, of Lamech,
of Methuselah, of Enoch, of Jared, of Mahalalel, of Cainan,
of Enosh, of Seth, of Adam, of God.
And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
being tempted forty days by the devil. And He ate nothing in those days, and they having ended, He was hungry.
And the devil said to Him, “If You are the Son of God, speak to this stone, that it should become bread.”
And Jesus answered to him, “It has been written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone.’”
And having led Him up, he showed Him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
And the devil said to Him, “I will give to You all this authority, and its glory; for it has been delivered to me, and I give it to whom I wish.
Therefore if You will worship before me, all will be Yours.”
And Jesus answering, said to him, “It has been written: ‘You shall worship the Lord Your God, and you shall serve Him only.’”
And he led Him to Jerusalem and set Him upon the pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him, “If You are the Son of God, cast Yourself down from here.
For it has been written: ‘He will give orders to His angels concerning You, to guard You;
and in their hands will they bear You up, lest ever You strike Your foot against a stone.’”
And Jesus answering, said to him, “It has been said, ‘You shall not test the Lord your God.’”
And the devil, having finished every temptation, departed from Him until an opportune time.
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and a report concerning Him went out into all the surrounding region.
And He was teaching in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
And He came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up; and according to His custom, He entered into the synagogue on the day of the Sabbaths, and stood up to read.
And the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to Him, and having unrolled the scroll, He found the place where it was written:
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because of which He has anointed Me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent Me to proclaim deliverance to the captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, to send forth in deliverance the oppressed,
to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
And having rolled up the scroll, having delivered it to the attendant, He sat down, and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon Him.
And He began to say to them, “Today this Scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.”
And all were bearing witness to Him and marveling at the grace of the words that are proceeding out of His mouth. And they were saying, “Is this not the son of Joseph?”
And He said to them, “Surely you will say to Me this proverb, ‘Physician heal yourself! Whatsoever we have heard has been done in Capernaum, do here in Your hometown also.’”
And He said, “Truly I say to you that no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
And in truth I say to you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months, when there was a great famine upon all the land;
and Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath of Sidon, to a woman, a widow.
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, and none of them was cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.”
And all in the synagogue were filled with anger, hearing these things,
and having risen up, they cast Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill upon which their town had been built, in order to throw Him over.
But He, having passed through their midst, went away.
And He went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And He was teaching them on the Sabbaths;
and they were astonished at His teaching, for His message was with authority.
And in the synagogue was a man having a spirit of an unclean demon; and he cried out in a loud voice,
“Ha! What to us and to You, Jesus of Nazareth? Are You come to destroy us? I know who You are, the Holy One of God!”
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent and come forth out of him!” And having thrown him into the midst, the demon came out from him, in nothing having hurt him.
And astonishment came upon all, and they were speaking to one another, saying, “What word is this, that He commands the unclean spirits with authority and power, and they come out?”
And the report concerning Him was spreading into every place of the surrounding region.
And having risen up out of the synagogue, He entered into the house of Simon. And Simon’s mother-in-law was oppressed with a great fever, and they appealed to Him for her.
And having stood over her, He rebuked the fever, and it left her; and immediately having arisen, she began to serve them.
And at the setting of the sun, all, as many as had any ailing with various diseases, brought them to Him, and having laid the hands on each one of them, He would heal them.
And demons also were going out from many, crying out and saying, “You are the Son of God.” And rebuking them, He did not allow them to speak, because they knew Him to be the Christ.
And daybreak having arrived, having gone out, He went into a solitary place, and the crowds were seeking Him, and came up to Him and were detaining Him, not to go from them.
But He said to them, “It behooves Me to preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns also, because for this I have been sent forth.”
And He was preaching in the synagogues of Judea.
And it came to pass, in the crowd pressing on Him also to hear the word of God, and He was standing by the lake of Gennesaret,
and He saw two boats lying by the lake, but the fishermen, having gone out from them, were washing the nets.
And having entered into one of the boats which was Simon’s, He asked him to put off a little from the land. And having sat down, He was teaching the crowds from the boat.
And when He left off speaking, He said to Simon, “Put off into the deep and let down your nets for a catch.”
And Simon answering, said, “Master, having toiled through whole night, we have taken nothing; but at Your word, I will let down the nets.”
And having done this, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes; and their nets were breaking.
And they beckoned to the partners in the other boat, having come, to help them, and they came and filled both boats, so that they were sinking.
And having seen, Simon Peter fell at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Depart from me, Lord. For I am a sinful man.”
For amazement laid hold on him, and on all those with him, at the catch of the fish which they had taken,
and likewise also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, “Fear not; from now on you will be catching men.”
And having brought the boats to the land, having left all, they followed Him.
And it came to pass in His being in one of the cities, that behold, a man full of leprosy, and having seen Jesus, having fallen upon his face, begged Him, saying, “Lord, if You would be willing, You are able to cleanse me.”
And having stretched out the hand, He touched him, saying, “I am willing; be you cleansed!” And immediately the leprosy departed from him.
And He ordered him to tell no one: “But having gone, show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”
And the report concerning Him was spread abroad still more; and great crowds were coming to hear and to be healed from their sicknesses.
And He Himself was withdrawing into the wilderness and praying.
And it came to pass on one of the days that He was teaching, and Pharisees and teachers of the law were there sitting by, who were come out of every village of Galilee, and of Judea, and of Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was there for Him to heal.
And behold, men carrying upon a mat a man who was paralyzed, and they were seeking to bring him in and to place him before Him.
And not having found what way they should bring him in, on account of the crowd, having gone up on the housetop, they let him down with the mat through the tiles, into the midst before Jesus.
And having seen their faith, He said, “Man, your sins have been forgiven you.”
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who is able to forgive sins, except God alone?”
And Jesus, having known their reasonings, answering, said to them, “Why do you reason in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins have been forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk?’
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on the earth to forgive sins...” He said to the one having been paralyzed, “I say to you, arise, and having taken up your mat, go to your house.”
And immediately having stood up before them, having taken up that on which he was lying, he departed to his home, glorifying God.
And amazement seized all, and they were glorifying God, and were filled with fear, saying, “We have seen remarkable things today.”
And after these things He went forth and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax booth. And He said to him, “Follow Me.”
And having left all, having arisen, he began to follow Him.
And Levi made a great banquet for Him in his house, and there was a great multitude of tax collectors and others, who were reclining with them.
And the Pharisees and their scribes were grumbling at His disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?”
And Jesus answering, said to them, “Those being well have no need of a physician, but those being sick.
I have not come to call righteous ones, but sinners, to repentance.”
And they said to Him, “The disciples of John fast often and make prayers; likewise also those of the Pharisees; but Yours eat and drink.”
And Jesus said to them, “Are you able to make the sons of the bridechamber to fast while the bridegroom is with them?
But days will come also when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.”
And He was speaking also a parable to them: “No one having torn a piece of new a garment, puts it on an old garment; but if otherwise, he will tear the new also, and the old will not match the piece which is of the new.
And no one puts new wine into old wineskins; if now otherwise, the new wine will burst the wineskins, and it will be spilled out, and the wineskins will be destroyed.
But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins.
And no one having drunk old wine desires new; for he says, ‘The old is better.’”
And it came to pass on a Sabbath, He is passing along through grainfields; and His disciples were plucking and were eating the heads of grain, rubbing them in the hands.
But some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing that which is not lawful on the Sabbaths?”
And Jesus answering, said to them, “Not even have you read this, that which David did when he himself was hungry, and those who were with him:
how he entered into the house of God, and having taken the loaves of the presentation, ate and gave to those with him, which it is not lawful to eat, except to the priests only?”
And He was saying to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
And it came to pass on another Sabbath, He entered into the synagogue and taught; and there was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
And the scribes and the Pharisees were closely watching Him, whether He will heal on the Sabbath, that they might find reason to accuse Him.
And He knew their thoughts, and He said to the man having the withered hand, “Arise and stand in the midst.” And having risen up, he stood.
Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you whether it is lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy?”
And having looked around on them all, He said to him, “Stretch out your hand.” And he did, and his hand was restored.
And they themselves were filled with rage, and were discussing with one another what they might do to Jesus.
And it came to pass in those days, He went out to the mountain to pray, and He was spending the night in prayer to God.
And when it became day, He summoned His disciples, also having chosen out from them twelve, whom also He named apostles:
Simon whom He also named Peter, and his brother Andrew; and James and John; and Philip and Bartholomew;
and Matthew and Thomas; and James son of Alphaeus; and Simon the one called Zealot;
and Judas son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who became the betrayer.
And having descended with them, He stood on a level place, and a large crowd of His disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Judea, and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon,
who came to hear Him and to be healed of their diseases. And those troubled with unclean spirits were healed.
And the whole multitude were seeking to touch Him, because power was going out from Him and healing all.
And He, having lifted up His gaze upon His disciples, was saying: “Blessed are the poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
Blessed are those hungering now, for you will be filled. Blessed are those weeping now, for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall exclude you, and shall insult you, and shall cast out your name as evil, on account of the Son of Man.
Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy; for behold, your reward is great in heaven. For their fathers according to these things used to treat the prophets likewise.
But woe to you who are rich, for you are receiving your comfort.
Woe to you having been filled now, for you will hunger. Woe to those laughing now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for according to these things their fathers used to treat the false prophets likewise.
But to you hearing I say: Love your enemies, do good to those hating you,
bless those cursing you, pray for those mistreating you.
To the one striking you on the cheek, offer the other also; and from the one taking away your cloak, do not withhold the tunic also.
Give to everyone asking you, and from the one taking away what is yours, do not ask it back.
And as you desire that men should do to you, do likewise to them.
And if you love those loving you, what credit is it to you? For even sinners love those loving them.
And indeed, if you do good to those doing good to you, what credit is it to you? For even sinners do the same.
And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive back, what credit is it to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, that they might receive the same amount.
But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing in return, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High; for He is kind to the ungrateful and evil.
Be you merciful, as your Father also is merciful.
And do not judge that you should not be judged; and do not condemn that you should not be condemned; forgive and you will be forgiven.
Give, and it will be given to you. A good measure pressed down, shaken together, running over will they put into your lap. For with that measure you measure, it will be measured again to you.”
And He spoke a parable also to them. “Is a blind man able to lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a pit?
A disciple is not above the teacher, and everyone fully trained will be like his teacher.
And why do you look at the splinter that is in your brother’s eye and not notice the beam that is in the own eye?
How are you able to say to your brother, ‘Brother let that I might cast out the splinter that is in your eye,’ yourself not seeing the beam in your eye? Hypocrite! First cast out the beam from your eye, and then you will see clearly to cast out the splinter in the eye of your brother.
For there is no good tree producing bad fruit, nor again a bad tree producing good fruit.
For each tree is known by its own fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush.
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good; and the evil out of the evil brings forth that which is evil. For out of the abundance of his heart, his mouth speaks.
And why do you call Me ‘Lord, Lord,’ and not do what I say?
Everyone who is coming to Me, and hearing My words, and doing them, I will show you whom he is like.
He is like to a man building a house, who dug and deepened, and laid a foundation on the rock. And a flood having come, the stream burst upon that house, and was not able to shake it, because it had been built well.
But the one having heard and not having done is like to a man having built a house on the ground without a foundation, on which the stream burst, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.”
And when He had completed all His words in the hearing of the people, He entered into Capernaum.
And a certain servant of a centurion, who was valued highly to him, being sick, was about to die.
And having heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to Him, begging Him that having come, He might save his servant.
And having come to Jesus, they were begging Him earnestly, saying, “He is worthy to whom You will grant this,
for he loves our nation, and he built the synagogue for us.”
And Jesus was going with them. And already, He being not far distant from the house, the centurion sent friends, saying to Him, “Lord, do not trouble Yourself, for I am not worthy that You should come under my roof.
Therefore neither did I count myself worthy to come to You; but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also am a man appointed under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
And Jesus having heard these things, marveled at him; and having turned to the crowd following Him, He said, “I say to you, not even in Israel did I find such great faith.”
And having returned to the house, those having been sent found the servant in good health.
And it came to pass on the next day, He went into a town called Nain, and His disciples were going with Him, and a great crowd.
And as He drew near to the gate of the town, also behold, one having died was being carried out, the only begotten son of his mother; and she was a widow. And a considerable crowd of the town was with her.
And the Lord having seen her, was moved with compassion on her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
And having come up, He touched the bier; and those bearing it stopped. And He said, “Young man, I say to you, Arise!”
And the dead man sat up and began to speak, and He gave him to his mother.
And fear seized all, and they began glorifying God, saying, “A great prophet has risen up among us!” and, “God has visited His people!”
And this report concerning Him went out in all Judea and all the surrounding region.
And his disciples brought word to John concerning all these things.
And having summoned a certain two his disciples, John sent them to the Lord saying, “Are You the coming One, or are we to look for another?”
And the men having come to Him said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying, ‘Are You the coming One, or are we to look for another?’”
At that very hour, He healed many of diseases and afflictions and evil spirits, and He granted many blind to see.
And answering, He said to them, “Having gone, relate to John what you have seen and heard: Blind receive sight, lame walk, lepers are cleansed and deaf hear, dead are raised, poor are gospelized.
And blessed is whoever shall not be offended in Me.”
And the messengers of John having departed, He began to speak to the crowds concerning John: “What have you gone out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
But what have you gone out to see? A man arrayed in fine clothing? Behold, those in splendid clothing and living in luxury are in palaces.
But what have you gone out to see? A prophet? Yes, I say to you, and one more excellent than a prophet.
This is he concerning whom it has been written: ‘Behold, I send My messenger before your face, who will prepare Your way before You.’
I say to you, no one among those born of women is greater than John; yet the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
And all the people having heard, even the tax collectors, declared God righteous, having been baptized with the baptism of John.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God as to themselves, not having been baptized by him.
“To what therefore will I liken the men of this generation? And to what are they like?
They are like to little children sitting in the marketplace and calling to one another, saying: ‘We piped to you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not weep.’
For John the Baptist has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon!’
The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold, a man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and of sinners!’
And wisdom was justified by all her children.”
And one of the Pharisees was asking Him that He should eat with him, and having entered into the house of the Pharisee, He reclined.
And behold, a woman in the city who was a sinner. And she having known that He had reclined in the Pharisee’s house, having taken an alabaster flask of fragrant oil,
and having stood behind Him at His feet weeping, she began to wet His feet with the tears, and she was wiping them with the hairs of her head, and was kissing His feet, and was anointing them with the fragrant oil.
And the Pharisee, the one having invited Him, having seen, spoke within himself, saying, “If this were a prophet, He would have known who and what the woman is who touches Him; for she is a sinner.”
And answering, Jesus said to him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” And he says, “Teacher, say it.”
“There were two debtors to a certain creditor. The one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
They having nothing to pay, he forgave both. Therefore which of them will love him more?”
Simon answering, said, “I take it that he to whom he forgave the most.” And He said to him, “You have judged rightly.”
And having turned to the woman, He was saying to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered into your house; you did not give water for My feet, but she wet My feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
You did not give to Me a kiss, but from which time I came in, she herself has not ceased kissing My feet.
You did not anoint My head with oil, but she herself anointed My feet with fragrant oil.
Therefore I say to you this: Her many sins have been forgiven, for she loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, he loves little.”
And He said to her, “Your sins have been forgiven.”
And those reclining began to say within themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?”
And He said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
And it came to pass soon afterward that He was traveling throughout city and village, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with Him,
and certain women who had been cured from evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who is called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
and Joanna wife of Chuza, a steward of Herod, and Susanna, and many others, who were ministering to them out of their own means.
And as a great crowd is assembling, and those from each town are coming to Him, He spoke by a parable:
“The one sowing went out to sow his seed. And in his sowing, some indeed fell along the road, and it was trampled upon, and the birds of the air devoured it.
And other fell upon the rock, and having sprung up it withered through having no moisture.
And other fell in the midst of the thorns, and the thorns having sprung up with it, choked it.
And other fell upon the good soil, and having sprung up, it produced fruit—a hundredfold.” Saying these things, He was calling out, “The one having ears to hear, let him hear.”
And His disciples were asking Him, “What does this parable mean?”
And He said, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest, it is in parables, so that, ‘Seeing, they may not see; and hearing, they may not understand.’
And the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
And those along the road are those having heard; then the devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, lest having believed, they should be saved.
And those upon the rock are those who receive the word with joy when they hear; and these have no root, who believe for a time, and in time of testing fall away.
And that having fallen into the thorns, these are those having heard, and moving along are choked under the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and do not mature.
And that in the good soil, these are those who, having heard the word, keep it in a worthy and good heart and bring forth fruit by perseverance.
And no one having lighted a lamp, covers it with a vessel, or puts it under a bed. But he puts it on a lampstand, so that those entering in may see the light.
For nothing is hidden which will not become manifest, nor secret which shall not be known and come to light.
Therefore take heed how you hear; for whoever might have, to him will be given; and whoever might not have, even what he seems to have will be taken away from him.”
And His mother and brothers came to Him, and they were not able to get to Him, because of the crowd.
And it was told Him, “Your mother and Your brothers are standing outside, wishing to see You.”
But answering, He said to them, “My mother and my brothers are those who are hearing and doing the word of God.”
And it came to pass, on one of the days also, He with His disciples entered into a boat, and He said to them, “Let us pass over to the other side of the lake.” And they launched out.
And of them sailing, He fell asleep. And a storm of wind came down on the lake, and they were being swamped, and were in danger.
And having approached, they awoke Him, saying, “Master, Master, we are perishing!” And having arisen, He rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and there was a calm.
And He said to them, “Where is your faith?” And having been afraid, they marveled, saying to one another, “Who then is this, that He commands even the winds and the water, and they obey Him?”
And they sailed down to the region of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.
And He having gone forth upon the land, a certain man out of the city met Him, having demons, and a long time he was not wearing clothing and did not abide in a house, but in the tombs.
And having seen Jesus, having cried out, he fell down before Him and said in a loud voice, “What to me and to You, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I implore of You that You might not torment me!”
For He was commanding the unclean spirit to come out from the man. For it had seized him many times, and he was bound, being kept with chains and shackles. And breaking the chains, he was driven by the demon into the deserts.
And Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “Legion,” because many demons were entered into him.
And they were begging Him not to command them to depart into the abyss.
And there was a herd of many pigs feeding there in the mountain, and they begged Him that He would allow them to enter into them; and He allowed them.
And the demons having gone out from the man, entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake, and was drowned.
And those feeding them, having seen that having taken place, fled and reported it to the city and to the country.
And they went out to see that having taken place, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out sitting, clothed, and being of sound mind, at the feet of Jesus. And they were afraid.
And those having seen it related to them how the one having been possessed by demons was healed.
And all the multitude of the surrounding region of the Gerasenes asked Him to depart from them, because they were seized with great fear. And He, having entered into the boat, turned back.
But the man from whom the demons had gone was begging Him to be taken with Him. But He sent him away saying,
“Return to your house, and relate all that God has done for you.” And he departed, proclaiming through the whole city all that Jesus had done for him.
And when Jesus returned, the crowd received Him, for they were all looking for Him.
And behold, a man whose name was Jairus came, and he was a ruler of the synagogue, and having fallen at the feet of Jesus, he began begging Him to come to his house,
because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. And as He went, the crowds were pressing around Him.
And a woman being with a flux of blood for twelve years, who, having spent all her living on physicians, was not able to be healed by anyone.
Having come behind Him, she touched the fringe of His cloak, and immediately her flux of blood stopped.
And Jesus said, “Who is the one having touched Me?” But all were denying it. Peter said, “Master, the people surround You and press in.”
But Jesus said, “Someone touched Me, for I know power has gone out from Me.”
And the woman, having seen that she was not hidden, came trembling, and having fallen down before Him before all the people, she declared for what cause she touched Him, and how she was healed immediately.
And He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has healed you; go in peace.”
Of Him still speaking, one comes from the synagogue ruler, saying, “Your daughter has died; trouble the Teacher no longer.”
But Jesus having heard, answered him, “Fear not; only believe, and she will be saved.”
And having entered into the house, He did not allow anyone to go in with Him, except Peter and John and James and the father and the mother of the child.
And all were weeping and mourning for her. But He said, “Do not weep; for she is not dead, but sleeps.”
And they were laughing at Him, knowing that she was dead.
And He having taken hold her of hand, called out, saying, “Child, arise!”
And her spirit returned, and she arose immediately; and He directed to be given to her to eat.
And her parents were amazed; and He instructed them to tell no one what had happened.
And having called together the Twelve, He gave to them power and authority over all the demons, and to heal diseases,
and He sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
And He said to them, “Take nothing for the journey, neither staff, nor bag, nor bread, nor money, nor two tunics apiece to have.
And into whatever house you might enter, remain there, and go forth from there.
And as many as might not receive you, going forth from that city, shake off the dust from your feet, as a testimony against them.”
And going forth, they were passing through the villages, proclaiming the gospel and healing everywhere.
And Herod the Tetrarch heard of all the things being done, and was perplexed, because it was said by some that John has been raised out from the dead,
and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that a prophet of the ancients had arisen.
And Herod said, “John I beheaded, but who is this concerning whom I hear such things?” And he was seeking to see Him.
And having returned, the apostles related to Him whatever they had done. And having taken them, He withdrew by Himself into a town called Bethsaida.
And the crowds having known it, followed Him; and having received them, He was speaking to them concerning the kingdom of God, and He was healing those having need of healing.
And the day began to decline, and the Twelve having come, said to Him, “Dismiss the crowd, that having gone into the surrounding villages and countryside, they might lodge and might find provisions; for we are in a desolate place here.”
And He said to them, “You give to them to eat.” But they said, “There are no more than five loaves to us, and two fish, unless we, having gone, should buy food for all this people.”
For they were about five thousand men. And He said to His disciples, “Make them sit down in groups of about fifty.”
And they did so and made all sit down.
And having taken the five loaves and the two fish, having looked up to the heaven, He blessed and broke them, and He kept giving them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
And they all ate and were satisfied; and that having been a surplus to them was taken up, twelve hand-baskets of fragments.
And it came to pass as He was praying in solitary, the disciples were with Him, and He questioned them, saying, “Whom do the crowds pronounce Me to be?”
And answering, they said, “John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, that a prophet, one of the ancients, has arisen.”
And He said to them, “But whom do you pronounce Me to be?” And Peter answering said, “The Christ of God.”
And having strictly warned them, He instructed them to tell this to no one,
having said, “It is necessary for the Son of Man to suffer many things, and to be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be killed, and on the third day to be raised.”
And He was saying to all, “If anyone desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross every day, and let him follow Me.
For whoever might desire to save his life will lose it; but whoever might lose his life on account of me, he will save it.
For what is a man profited, having gained the whole world, and having destroyed or having suffered the loss of himself?
For whoever may have been ashamed of Me and My words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when He shall come in His glory, and that of the Father and of the holy angels.
And I say to you truthfully, there are some of those standing here who shall not taste of death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God.”
And it came to pass, about eight days after these sayings, and having taken Peter and John and James, He went up on the mountain to pray.
And it came to pass in His praying, the appearance of His face was altered, and His clothing became dazzling white.
And behold, two men began talking with Him, who were Moses and Elijah.
Those having appeared in glory were speaking of His going out, which He was about to accomplish in Jerusalem.
And Peter and those with him were heavy with sleep; and having awoken fully, they saw His glory, and the two men standing with Him.
And it came to pass in their departing from Him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here; let us make also three tabernacles, one for You, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah,” not knowing what he is saying.
And as he is saying these things, a cloud came and was overshadowing them; and they feared in their entering into the cloud.
And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My Son, whom I have chosen; listen to Him!”
And as the voice occurred, Jesus was found alone. And they were silent, and they told to no one in those days anything of what they had seen.
And it came to pass the next day, on their having come down from the mountain, a great crowd met Him.
And behold, a man from the crowd cried out, saying, “Teacher, I implore You to look upon my son, for he is an only child to me.
And behold, a spirit takes him, and suddenly he cries out, and it throws him into convulsions with foaming, and with difficulty it departs from him, crushing him.
And I begged Your disciples that they might cast it out, and they were not able.”
And Jesus answering said, “O unbelieving and perverted generation, until when will I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.”
And while he was coming near, the demon threw him down, and threw him into convulsions. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
And all were astonished at the majesty of God. But of all wondering at all that He did, He said to His disciples,
“You let these words sink into your ears; for the Son of Man is about to be betrayed into the hands of men.”
But they did not understand this saying, and it was veiled from them, that they should not understand it. And they were afraid to ask Him concerning this saying.
And an argument came up among them, which of them might be greatest.
But Jesus, having known the reasoning of their heart, having taken hold of a child, set it by Him,
and He said to them, “Whoever shall receive this child in My name, receives Me; and whoever shall receive Me, receives the One having sent Me. For the one being least among you all, he shall be great.”
And John answering said, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in Your name, and we were forbidding him, because he does not follow with us.”
And Jesus said to him, “Do not forbid it; for whoever is not against us is for us.”
And it came to pass in the completing of the days of His ascension, that He steadfastly set the face to go to Jerusalem.
And He sent messengers before His face. And having gone, they entered into a village of the Samaritans, so as to make ready for Him.
And they did not receive Him, because His face was going toward Jerusalem.
And the disciples James and John having seen it, said, “Lord, will You that we should call fire to come down from heaven and to consume them?”
And having turned, He rebuked them,
and they went to another village.
And as they were going along the road, someone said to Him, “I will follow You wherever You may go.”
And Jesus said to him, “The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests; but the Son of Man has nowhere He might lay the head.”
And He said to another, “Follow Me.” But he said, “Lord, allow me first, having gone away, to bury my father.”
And He said to him, “Leave the dead to bury their own dead; but you, having gone forth, declare the kingdom of God.”
And another also said, “I will follow You, Lord; but first allow me to bid farewell to those at my home.”
And Jesus said to him, “No one having laid the hand upon the plow, and looking on the things behind, is fit for the kingdom of God.”
Now after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy-two others and sent them in two by two before His face, into every city and place where He Himself was about to go.
And He was saying to them, “The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the workmen are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest, that He may send out workmen into His harvest.
Go; behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Carry no purse, nor bag, nor sandals; and greet no one on the road.
And into whatever house you might enter, first say, ‘Peace to this house.’
And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon it; but if not so, it will return to you.
And remain in the same house, eating and drinking the things supplied by them; for the workman is worthy of his wages. Do not move from house to house.
And into whatever city you might enter and they receive you, eat the things set before you.
And heal the sick in it, and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God has drawn near to you.’
And into whatever city you might enter and they do not receive you, having gone out into its streets, say,
‘Even the dust from your city having clung to our feet, we wipe off against you; yet know this, that the kingdom of God has drawn near.’
I say to you that it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city.
Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles having taken place in you had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you.
And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted up to heaven? No, you will be brought down to Hades.
The one hearing you hears Me; and the one rejecting you rejects Me; and the one rejecting Me rejects the One having sent Me.”
And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying, “Lord, even the demons are subject to us through Your name.”
And He said to them, “I beheld Satan having fallen as lightning out of heaven.
Behold, I give you the authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy, and nothing will injure you.
Yet do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are subjected to you; but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens.”
In the same hour, He rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said, “I fully consent to You, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and have revealed them to little children; yes, Father, for thus was it well-pleasing before You.
All things have been delivered to Me by My Father. And no one knows who the Son is, except the Father; and who the Father is, except the Son, and those to whom the Son might resolve to reveal Him.”
And having turned to the disciples, He said in private, “Blessed are the eyes seeing what you see!
For I say to you that many prophets and kings desired to see what you see, and did not see; and to hear what you hear, and did not hear.”
And behold, a certain lawyer stood up, testing Him, saying, “Teacher, what having done, will I inherit eternal life?”
And He said to him, “What has been written in the Law? How do you read it?”
And answering, he said, “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind’ and ‘Your neighbor as yourself.’”
And He said to him, “You have answered correctly. Do this and you will live.”
But desiring to justify himself, he said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
Jesus having taken it up, then said, “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who both having stripped him and having inflicted wounds, went away having left him half dead.
Now by chance a certain priest was going down on that road, and having seen him, he passed by on the opposite side.
And likewise also a Levite having come to the spot, and having seen him, passed by on the opposite side.
But a certain Samaritan journeying came to him, and having seen him was moved with compassion,
and having approached Him, he bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; and having put him on his own beast, he brought him to an inn and took care of him.
And on the next day, having taken out two denarii, he gave them to the innkeeper and said, ‘Take care of him, and whatever more you might expend, I will repay you on my returning.’
Which of these three seems to you to have been a neighbor of the one having fallen among the robbers?”
And he said, “The one having shown compassion toward him.” Then Jesus said to him, “You go and do likewise.”
Now in their proceeding, He entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha received Him into the home.
And she had a sister called Mary, who also, having sat down at the feet of the Lord, was listening to His word.
But Martha was distracted about much service; and having come up, she said, “Lord, is it not concerning to You that my sister has left me alone to serve? Therefore speak to her, that she might help me!”
And the Lord answering said to her, “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things;
but one thing is necessary, only one; for Mary has chosen the good portion, which will not be taken away from her.”
And it came to pass in His being in a certain place praying, when He ceased, one of His disciples said to Him, “Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.”
And He said to them, “When you pray say: ‘Father, hallowed be Your name. Your kingdom come.
Give us each day our daily bread.
And forgive us our sins, for also we ourselves forgive everyone indebted to us; and lead us not into temptation.’”
And He said to them, “Who among you will have a friend, and will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
since a friend of mine is come to me off a journey, and I have nothing that I will set before him.’
And he answering from within will say, ‘Do not cause me trouble; the door already has been shut, and my children are with me in bed; I am not able, having risen up, to give to you.’
I say to you, even though he will not give to him, having risen up because of being his friend; yet because of his persistence, having risen, he will give him as much as he needs.
And I say to you: Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and it will be opened to you.
For everyone asking receives; and the one seeking finds; and to the one knocking, it will be opened.
And which father among you, if the son will ask for a fish, and instead of a fish, will give to him a serpent?
Or also if he will ask for an egg, will he give to him a scorpion?
Therefore if you, being evil, know to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the Father who is in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those asking Him!”
And He was casting out a demon, and it was mute; and it came to pass, the demon having gone out, the mute man spoke. And the crowds marveled.
And some of them said, “By Beelzebul the prince of the demons He casts out the demons.”
And others, testing, were seeking from Him a sign from heaven.
And He knowing their thoughts, said to them, “Every kingdom having been divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house against a house falls.
And if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say I cast out the demons by Beelzebul.
And if I cast out the demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? On account of this, they will be your judges.
But if I cast out the demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
When the strong man being armed might guard his house, his possessions are in peace.
But when one stronger than he, having come upon him, shall overcome him, he takes away his complete armor in which he had trusted, and he divides his plunder.
The one not being with Me is against Me; and the one not gathering with Me scatters.
When the unclean spirit is gone out from the man, it passes through waterless places, seeking rest and not finding any. Then it says, ‘I will return to my house, from where I came out.’
And having come, it finds it swept and put in order.
Then it goes and takes seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having entered, they dwell there; and the last of that man becomes worse than the first.”
And it came to pass, in His saying these things, a certain woman from the crowd, having lifted up her voice, said to Him, “Blessed is the womb having borne You, and the breasts at which You nursed.”
And He said, “No rather, blessed are those hearing the word of God and keeping it.”
And of the crowds being pressed around together, He began to say, “This generation is an evil generation; it seeks after a sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah.
For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, thus also the Son of Man will be to this generation.
The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them. For she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, greater than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it. For they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, greater than Jonah is here.
But no one having lit a lamp, sets it in secret, nor under the basket, but upon the lampstand, that those entering in may see the light.
Your eye is the lamp of your body. When your eye is clear, your whole body is also light; but when it is evil, your body is also dark.
Therefore take heed, lest the light that is in you be darkness.
If therefore your body is full of light, not having any part dark, it will be all light, as when the lamp shining might light you.”
And as He was speaking, a Pharisee asked Him that He would dine with him. And having entered, He reclined.
And the Pharisee, having seen, marveled that He did not wash first before the dinner.
And the Lord said to him, “Now you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but your inside is full of plundering and wickedness.
Fools! Did not the One having made the outside make the inside also?
But give as alms the things being within, and behold, all things are clean to you.
But woe to you Pharisees, for you pay tithes of mint and rue and every herb; and you pass by justice and the love of God. But it behooved you to do these things, and those not to neglect.
Woe to you Pharisees, for you love the first seat in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces.
Woe to you, for you are like unmarked graves, and the men walking above have not known it.”
And one of the lawyers answering, says to Him, “Teacher, saying these things You insult us also.”
And He said, “Woe to you lawyers also! For you burden men with burdens heavy to bear, and you yourselves do not touch the burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe to you, for you build the tombs of the prophets, yet your fathers killed them.
So you are witnesses and consent to the works of your fathers; for indeed they killed them, and you build their tombs.
Because of this also, the Wisdom of God said, ‘I will send to them prophets and apostles, and some of them they will kill and persecute,’
so that the blood of all the prophets having been poured out from the foundation of the world might be charged against this generation,
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, the one having perished between the altar and the house. Yes, I say to you, it will be required of this generation.
Woe to you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of knowledge. You yourselves did not enter, and you hindered those who are entering.”
Of Him having gone forth from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began urgently to press upon Him and to make Him speak about many things,
watching to catch Him in something out of his mouth.
In these times, the myriads of the crowd having been gathered together so as to trample upon one another, He began to say to His disciples first, “Take heed to yourselves of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
And nothing is concealed up which will not be revealed, nor hidden which will not be known.
Instead, whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you have spoken into the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed upon the housetops.
And I say to you, My friends, you should not fear because of those killing the body and after these things not being able to do anything more abundantly.
But I will show you whom you should fear: Fear the One who has authority, after the killing, to cast into Gehenna. Yes, I say to you, fear Him.
Are not five sparrows sold for two assarion? And not one of them is forgotten before God.
But even the hairs of your head all have been numbered. Fear not; you are more valuable than many sparrows.
And I say to you, everyone who will confess in Me before men, the Son of Man also will confess in him before the angels of God.
And the one having denied Me before men will be denied before the angels of God.
And everyone who will speak a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but the one having blasphemed against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
And when they bring you before the synagogues and the rulers and the authorities, do not be anxious how or what you shall reply in defense, or what you should say.
For the Holy Spirit will teach you in the same hour what it behooves you to say.”
And one from the crowd said to Him, “Teacher, say to my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
And He said to him, “Man, who appointed Me a judge or partitioner over you?”
And He said to them, “Beware, and keep yourselves from all covetousness; for not to anyone is his life in the abundance of that which he possesses.”
And He spoke a parable to them, saying, “The ground of a certain rich man brought forth abundantly.
And he was reasoning within himself, saying, ‘What shall I do, for I have nowhere I will store up my fruits?’
And he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns, and will build greater ones, and will store up there all my grain and goods.
And I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have many good things laid up for many years; take your rest; eat, drink, be merry.”’
And God said to him, ‘Fool! This night, your soul is required of you; and what you did prepare—to whom will it be?’
So is the one treasuring up for himself, and not being rich toward God.”
And He said to His disciples, “Because of this I say to you, do not be anxious for life, what you should eat, nor for your body, what you should put on.
For life is more than food, and the body than clothing.
Consider the ravens, that they do not sow, nor reap; to them there is not a storehouse, nor barn—and God feeds them. How much more valuable are you than the birds!
And which of you, being anxious, is able to add one hour to his lifespan?
If, then, you cannot even do the least, why are you anxious about the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow: They do not labor, nor do they spin. But I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
But if God thus clothes the grass in the field, being here today and tomorrow being thrown into the furnace, how much more you, O you of little faith!
And you, do not seek what you might eat, and what you might drink, and do not be in suspense;
for all the nations of the world seek after these things, and your Father knows that you have need of these.
But seek you His kingdom, and these things will be added to you.
Do not fear, little flock, for your Father took delight to give you the kingdom.
Sell your possessions and give alms; make to yourselves purses not growing old, an unfailing treasure in the heavens, where thief does not draw near, nor does moth destroy.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Let your waist be girded about, and the lamps burning.
And you, like to men waiting for their master, whenever he shall return from the wedding feasts, that having come and having knocked, they might open to him immediately.
Blessed are those servants whom, having come, the master will find watching. Truly I say to you that he will gird himself and will make them recline, and having come up, will serve them.
And if he comes in the second, and if in the third watch, and finds them thus, blessed are those!
But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what hour the thief is coming, he would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
You also, be ready; for the Son of Man comes in the hour you do not expect.”
And Peter said, “Lord, do You speak this parable to us, or also to all?”
And the Lord said, “Who then is the faithful, wise manager, whom the master will set over the care of his servants, to give them the measure of food in season?
Blessed is that servant whom, having come, his master will find thus doing.
Of a truth I say to you that he will set him over all his possessions.
But if that servant should say in his heart, ‘My master delays to come,’ and should begin to beat the men-servants and the maid-servants, and to eat and to drink and to get drunk,
the master of that servant will come in a day in which he does not expect, and in an hour that he does not know, and he will cut him in two and will appoint him a place with the unbelievers.
Now that servant, the one having known the will of his master, and not having prepared nor having done according to his will, will be beaten with many blows.
But the one not having known, but having done things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few. And everyone to whom much has been given, much will be required; and from him to whom much has been committed, more will they ask of him.
I came to cast fire upon the earth, and how I wish it were kindled already!
But I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and how I am distressed until it should be accomplished!
Do you think that I came to give peace on the earth? No, I say to you, but rather division.
For from now there will be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
They will be divided father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
And also He was saying to the crowds, “When you see a cloud rising up from the west, immediately you say, ‘A shower is coming,’ and so it happens.
And when a south wind is blowing, you say, ‘There will be heat,’ and it happens.
Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the earth and of the sky, but how do you not know to discern this time?
And why do you not even judge for yourselves what is right?
For as you are going with your adversary before a magistrate, give earnestness to be set free from him in the way, lest he should drag you away to the judge, and the judge will deliver you to the officer, and the officer will cast you into prison.
I say to you, you shall never come out from there until you shall have paid even the last lepton.”
Now at the same time some were present, telling Him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.
And answering, He said to them, “Do you think that these Galileans were sinners beyond all the Galileans, because they have suffered such things?
No, I say to you; but unless you repent, you will all perish likewise.
Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: Do you think that these were debtors beyond all the men dwelling in Jerusalem?
No, I say to you; but unless you repent, you will all perish likewise.”
And He was speaking this parable: “A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit on it, and not did find any.
And he said to the vinedresser, ‘Behold, throughout these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and do not find any. Therefore cut it down! Why even should it use up the ground?’
And answering, he says to him, ‘Sir, let it alone this year also, until I shall dig around it, and put in manure,
and if indeed it should bear fruit in the time, so be it. But if not, you will cut it down.’”
And He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbaths.
And behold, a woman having a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was bent over and not able to lift herself up to the full.
And having seen her, Jesus called her near and said to her, “Woman, you have been freed from your sickness.”
And He laid the hands upon her, and immediately she was made straight and began to glorify God.
And answering, the ruler of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, was saying to the crowd, “There are six days in which it behooves one to work. Therefore coming, be healed in these, and not on the day of the Sabbath.”
Therefore the Lord answered him and said, “Hypocrites! Does not each one of you untie his ox or donkey from the stall on the Sabbath, and having led it away, give it to drink?
And this, being a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound, behold, eighteen years, ought she not to be loosed from this bond on the day of the Sabbath?”
And of Him saying these things, all those opposed to Him were ashamed; and the whole crowd was rejoicing at all the glorious things that were being done by Him.
And He was saying, “To what is the kingdom of God like? And to what shall I liken it?
It is like to a grain of mustard, which a man having taken, cast into his garden; and it grew and came into a tree, and the birds of the air encamped in its branches.”
And again He said, “To what shall I liken the kingdom of God?
It is like to leaven, which a woman, having taken, hid in three measures of meal, until it all was leavened.”
And He was going through by towns and villages, teaching and making progress toward Jerusalem.
And someone said to Him, “Lord, if those being saved are few?” And He said to them,
“Strive to enter in through the narrow door; for many, I say to you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.
From the time the master of the house shall have risen up and shall have shut the door, then you shall begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us.’ And he answering, will say to you, ‘I do not know from where you are.’
Then will you begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’
And he will say, ‘I tell you, I do not know from where you are; depart from me, all you workers of unrighteousness.’
There will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you are being cast out.
And they will come from east and west, and from north and south, and will recline in the kingdom of God.
And behold, there are last who will be first, and there are first who will be last.”
In the same hour certain Pharisees came near, saying to Him, “Go out and proceed from here, for Herod desires to kill You.”
And He said to them, “Having gone, say to that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and I complete cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I am perfected.’
But it behooves Me to proceed today and tomorrow and the following day. For it is not possible for a prophet to perish outside of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets, and stoning those having been sent to her, how often I have wanted to gather your children, the way that a hen gathers her brood under the wings, and you were not willing.
Behold, your house is left to you. And I say to you, you shall not see Me until the time comes when you say, ‘Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord.’”
And it came to pass, on His going into a house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath, to eat bread, that they were watching Him.
And behold, there was a certain man with dropsy before Him.
And Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and to the Pharisees, saying, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?”
But they were silent. And having taken hold of him, He healed him and let him go.
And He said to them, “Which of you whose son or ox will fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, also will not immediately pull him up?”
And they were not able to reply to these things.
And He was speaking a parable to those having been invited, remarking how they were choosing out the first places, saying to them,
“When you are invited by anyone to wedding feasts, do not recline in the first place, lest one more honorable than you might have been invited by him.
And the one having invited you and him, having come, will say to you, ‘Give your place to this one,’ and then with shame you should begin to take the last place.
But when you are invited, having gone, recline in the last place, so that when the one having invited you might come, he will say to you, ‘Friend, come up higher.’ Then glory will be to you before all those reclining with you.
For everyone exalting himself will be humbled, and the one humbling himself will be exalted.”
And also He was saying to the one having invited Him, “When you make a dinner or a supper, do not call your friends, nor your brothers, nor your relatives, nor rich neighbors, lest ever they also should invite you in return, and recompense be made to you.
But when you make a feast, call the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
and you will be blessed, because they have nothing to repay you. For it will be recompensed to you in the resurrection of the righteous.”
And one of those reclining with Him, having heard these things, said to Him, “Blessed is he who will eat bread in the kingdom of God.”
But He said to him, “A certain man was preparing a great supper, and invited many.
And at the hour of the supper, he sent his servant to say to those having been invited, ‘Come, for now it is ready.’
And all with one voice began to excuse themselves. The first said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I have need, going out, to see it. I beg of you, hold me excused.’
And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to prove them. I beg of you, hold me excused.’
And another said, ‘I have married a wife, and because of this I am not able to come.’
And the servant having come, reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house, having become angry, said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
And the servant said, ‘Sir, as you did command, it has been done, and there is still room.’
And the master said to the servant, ‘Go out into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in, so that my house may be filled.
For I say to all of you that not one of those men having been invited will taste my supper.’”
And great crowds were going with Him, and having turned, He said to them,
“If anyone comes to Me, and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters and yes, even his life, he is not able to be My disciple.
Whoever does not carry his cross and come after Me is not able to be My disciple.
For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first, having sat down, count the cost, whether he has enough for its completion?
Otherwise, he having laid its foundation and not being able to finish, all seeing it may begin to mock him,
saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish.’
Or what king, proceeding to engage with another king in war, will not, having sat down, first take counsel whether he is able with ten thousand to meet the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
And if not, of him being still far off, having sent an embassy, he asks for peace.
So therefore every one of you who does not give up all that he himself possesses, is not able to be My disciple.
Therefore salt is good, but if even the salt becomes tasteless, with what will it be seasoned?
It is fit neither for soil nor for manure; they cast it out. The one having ears to hear, let him hear.”
Now all the tax collectors and the sinners were drawing near to Him to hear Him.
And both the Pharisees and the scribes were grumbling saying, “This man receives sinners and eats with them.”
And He spoke to them this parable, saying,
“What man of you, having a hundred sheep, and having lost one of them, does not leave the ninety nine in the open field, and go after the one having been lost, until he finds it?
And having found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
And having come to the house, he calls together the friends and the neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep, the one having been lost!’
I say to you that in the same way there will be joy in heaven over one sinner repenting, rather than over ninety nine righteous ones who have no need of repentance.
Or what woman having ten drachmas, if she should lose one drachma, does not light a lamp and sweep the house, and seek carefully until she finds it?
And having found it, she calls together the friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma that I lost.’
Thus I say to you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner repenting.”
And He said, “A certain man had two sons.
And the younger of them said to the father, ‘Father, give to me the portion of the property falling to me.’ And he divided the property between them.
And not many days later, the younger son having gathered together all, went away into a distant country, and there he wasted his estate, living prodigally.
But of him having spent all, there arose a severe famine throughout that country, and he began to be in need.
And having gone, he joined himself to one of the citizens of that the country, and he sent him into his fields to feed pigs.
And he was longing to fill his belly from the pods that the pigs were eating, and no one was giving to him.
But having come to himself, he was saying, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have abundance of bread, but here I am perishing with hunger?
Having risen up, I will go to my father, and I will say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you;
no longer am I worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your servants.”’
And having risen up, he went to his father. And he still being far distant, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and having run, fell upon his neck and kissed him.
And the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; no longer am I worthy to be called your son.’
And the father said to his servants, ‘Quickly bring out the best robe and clothe him, and give him a ring for his hand and sandals for his feet;
and having brought the fattened calf, kill it, and having eaten, let us be merry.
For this son of mine was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’ And they began to be merry.
And his elder son was in the field, and while coming up, he drew near to the house; he heard music and dancing.
And having called near one of the servants, he began inquiring what these things might be.
And he said to him, ‘Your brother is come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him in good health.’
But he was angry, and was not willing to go in. And his father, having gone, was begging him.
And answering, he said to his father, ‘Behold, so many years I serve you, and never did I disobey a commandment of yours; and never did you give to me a young goat, that I might make merry with my friends.
But when this son of yours came, the one having devoured your living with prostitutes, you have killed the fattened calf for him!’
And he said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours.
But it was fitting to make merry and to rejoice, because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again; and he was lost and is found.’”
Now also He was saying to the disciples, “There was a certain rich man who had a manager, and was accused unto him as he is wasting his possessions.
And having called him, he said to him, ‘What is this I hear concerning you? Give the account of your stewardship, for you are not able to manage any longer.’
And the manager said within himself, ‘What shall I do, for my master is taking away the management from me? I am not able to dig; I am ashamed to beg.
I know what I will do, so that when I shall have been removed from the management, they might receive me into their homes.’
And having summoned each one of his master’s debtors, he was saying to the first, ‘How much do you owe to my master?’
And he said, ‘A hundred baths of oil.’ And he said to him, ‘Take your bill, and having sat down quickly, write fifty.’
Then he said to another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ And he said, ‘A hundred cors of wheat.’ He says to him, ‘Take your bill and write eighty.’
And the master praised the unrighteous manager because he had acted shrewdly. For the sons of this age are more shrewd than the sons of the light in their own generation.
And I say to you, make friends for yourselves by the mammon of unrighteousness, that when it fails, they might receive you into the eternal dwellings.
The one faithful in very little is also faithful in much, and the one unrighteous in very little is also unrighteous in much.
If therefore you have not been faithful in unrighteous mammon, who will entrust to you the true?
And unless you have been faithful in that which is of another, who will give to you that which is yours?
No servant is able to serve two masters. For either he will hate the one and he will love the other, or he will be devoted to one and he will despise the other. You are not able to serve God and mammon.”
Now the Pharisees, being lovers of money, were listening to all these things, and they were ridiculing Him.
And He said to them, “You are those justifying themselves before men, but God knows your hearts; for that which is exalted among men is an abomination before God.
The Law and the prophets were until John. From that time the kingdom of God is proclaimed, and everyone forces his way into it.
But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than one stroke of a letter of the Law to fail.
Everyone putting away his wife and marrying another commits adultery. And the one marrying her put away from a husband commits adultery.
And there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and fine linen, making good cheer in splendor every day.
And a certain poor man named Lazarus, being full of sores, was laid at his gate
and desiring to be fed from that falling from the table of the rich man; but even the dogs, coming, were licking his sores.
And it came to pass that the poor man died, and he was carried away by the angels into the bosom of Abraham. And the rich man also died and was buried.
And in Hades, having lifted up his eyes, being in torment, he sees Abraham from afar, and Lazarus in his bosom.
And having cried out, he said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, that he might dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am suffering in this flame.’
And Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you did fully receive your good things in your lifetime, and Lazarus likewise the evil things. But now he is comforted here, and you are suffering.
And besides all these things, a great chasm has been fixed between us and you, so that those desiring to pass from here to you are not able, nor can they pass from there to us.’
And he said, ‘Then I implore you, father, that you would send him to my father’s house—
for I have five brothers—so that he might warn them, that they also might not come to this place of torment.’
But Abraham says, ‘They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.’
And he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if one from the dead should go to them, they will repent.’
But he said to him, ‘If they do not hear Moses and the prophets, not even will they be persuaded if one should rise out from the dead.’”
And He said to His disciples, “It is impossible for the stumbling blocks not to come, but woe to him by whom they come!
It is better for him if a millstone is hung around his neck and he is thrown into the sea, than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Take heed to yourselves: If your brother should sin, rebuke him; and if he should repent, forgive him.
And if he should sin against you seven times in the day, and seven times should return to you, saying ‘I repent,’ you shall forgive him.”
And the apostles said to the Lord, “Add to us faith!”
And the Lord said, “If you have faith like a grain of mustard, you would have said to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and be planted in the sea,’ and it would have obeyed you.
And which of you having a servant plowing or shepherding, the one having come in out of the field, will say to him ‘Having come, immediately recline?’
Instead, will he not say to him, ‘Prepare what I may eat, and having girded yourself about, serve me while I eat and drink; and after these things you shall eat and drink’?
Is he thankful to the servant because he did the things having been commanded?
Thus you also, when you may have done all the things having been commanded you, say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we have done that which we were bound to do.’”
And it came to pass in going up to Jerusalem, that He was passing through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
And on His entering into a certain village, ten leprous men met Him, who stood afar off.
And they lifted up their voice, saying, “Jesus, Master, have compassion on us.”
And having seen them, He said to them, “Having gone, show yourselves to the priests.” And it came to pass in their going, they were cleansed.
And one of them, having seen that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice,
and he fell on his face at His feet, giving thanks to Him. And he was a Samaritan.
And Jesus, having answered, said, “Were not the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?
Was there found none having returned to give glory to God, except this foreigner?”
And He said to him, “Having risen up go forth; your faith has cured you!”
And having been asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God is coming, He answered them and said, “The kingdom of God does not come with careful observation,
nor will they say, ‘Behold here,’ or ‘There.’ For behold, the kingdom of God is in your midst.”
And He said to the disciples, “The days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.
And they will say to you, ‘Behold there,’ or ‘Behold here.’ Do not go forth nor follow.
For as the lightning shines, flashing from the one end of the sky to the other end of the sky, thus the Son of Man will be in His day.
But first it behooves Him to suffer many things, and to be rejected by this generation.
And as it came to pass in the days of Noah, thus also will it be in the days of the Son of Man:
They were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they were being given in marriage, until that day Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed all.
Likewise, as it came to pass in the days of Lot, they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building;
and in that day Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed all.
It will be according to these in that day the Son of Man is revealed.
In that day, the one who will be on the housetop, and his goods in the house, do not let him come down to take them away; and likewise the one in the field, do not let him return to the things behind.
Remember Lot’s wife!
Whoever may seek to save his life will lose it; but whoever will lose it will preserve it.
I say to you, in that night there will be two upon one bed: The one will be taken, and the other will be left.
There will be two women grinding at the same place: The one will be taken, and the other will be left.”

And answering, they say to Him, “Where, Lord?” And He said to them, “Where the body is, there also the vultures will be gathered together.”
And He was speaking to them a parable about the way it behooves them always to pray and not to lose heart,
saying, “In a certain city, there was a certain judge, not fearing God, and not respecting man.
And there was a widow in that city, and she was coming to him, saying, ‘Avenge me of my adversary.’
And for a time he would not, but afterward he said within himself, ‘Even if I do not fear God, nor respect man,
yet because this widow causes me trouble, I will avenge her, so that in the end she does not exhaust me, coming to me.’”
And the Lord said, “Hear what the unrighteous judge says.
And shall not God execute the avenging of His elect, the ones crying out to Him day and night, and be deferring in regard to them?
I say to you that He will execute their avenging in quickness. Nevertheless, the Son of Man having come, will He find faith on the earth?”
And He also spoke this parable to some trusting in themselves that they are righteous, and despising others:
“Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a tax collector.
The Pharisee having stood, was praying toward himself thus: ‘God, I thank You that I am not like the rest of the men—swindlers, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice in the week; I tithe all things, as many as I gain.’
But the tax collector, standing afar off, was not even willing to lift up the eyes to heaven, but was striking his breast, saying, ‘God, be merciful to me, the sinner!’
I say to you, this one went down to his house justified, rather than that. For everyone exalting himself will be humbled; but the one humbling himself will be exalted.”
And they were bringing the infants also to Him, that He might touch them; but the disciples having seen, were rebuking them.
But Jesus, having called them to Him, said, “Permit the little children to come to Me, and do not forbid them; for of the such is the kingdom of God.
Truly I say to you, whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a child, shall not at all enter into it.”
And a certain ruler asked Him, saying, “Good Teacher, having done what, will I inherit eternal life?”
And Jesus said to him, “Why do you call Me good? No one is good, except God alone.
You know the commandments: ‘You shall not commit adultery, you shall not murder, you shall not steal, you shall not bear false witness, you shall honor your father and mother.’”
And he said, “All these have I kept from my youth.”
And having heard, Jesus said to him, “To you, yet one thing is lacking: Sell all, as much as you have, and distribute to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come, follow Me.”
And having heard these things, he became very sorrowful; for he was extremely rich.
And having seen him, Jesus became sorrowful, saying, “How difficultly those having riches shall enter into the kingdom of God.
For it is easier for a camel to go through an eye of a needle, than a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
And those having heard said, “Then who is able to be saved?”
But He said, “The things impossible with men are possible with God.”
And Peter said, “Behold, we having left the own, followed You.”
And He said to them, “Truly I say to you that there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God,
who shall not receive manifold more in this time—and in the age that is coming, eternal life.”
And having taken aside the Twelve, He said to them, “Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things having been written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be accomplished.
For He will be betrayed to the Gentiles and will be mocked and will be insulted and will be spit upon.
And having flogged Him, they will kill Him; and on the third day He will rise again.”
And they understood none of these things, and this word was hidden from them, and they did not know the things being spoken.
And it came to pass in His drawing near to Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting beside the road, begging.
And having heard a crowd passing along, he was asking what this might be.
And they told him, “Jesus of Nazareth is passing by.”
And he called out saying, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
And those going before were rebuking him, that he should be silent. But he kept crying out much more, “Son of David, have mercy on me.”
And Jesus, having stopped, commanded him to be brought to Him. And of him having drawn near, He asked him,
“What do you desire I shall do to you?” And he said, “Lord, that I might receive sight.”
And Jesus said to him, “Receive sight! Your faith has healed you.”
And immediately he received sight and began following Him, glorifying God. And all the people having seen it gave praise to God.
And having entered, He was passing through Jericho.
And behold, a man by name called Zacchaeus, and he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
And he was seeking to see Jesus, who He is. And he was not able because of the crowd, for he was small in stature.
And having run to the front, he went up into a sycamore-fig tree, so that he might see Him; for He was about to pass that way.
And as He came to the place, Jesus having looked up, said to him, “Zacchaeus, having hurried, come down, for it behooves Me to stay in your house today.”
And having hurried, he came down and received Him, rejoicing.
And having seen it, all were grumbling, saying, “He has entered to stay with a sinful man.”
And Zacchaeus having stood, said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded anything of anyone, I restore it fourfold.”
And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that having been lost.”
While they were hearing these things, having proceeded, He spoke a parable because of His being near Jerusalem and of their thinking that the kingdom of God is about to appear immediately.
Therefore He said, “A certain man of noble birth proceeded to a distant country, to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.
And having called ten of his servants, he gave to them ten minas and said to them, ‘Do business until that I come back.’
But his citizens hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We are not willing for this man to reign over us.’
And it came to pass, on his returning, having received the kingdom, that he directed these servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, in order that he might know what each had gained by trading.
And the first came up, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has produced ten more minas.’
And He said to him, ‘Well done, good servant! Because you were faithful in very little, you are to be having authority over ten cities.’
And the second came, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has made five minas.’
And he said to this one also, ‘And you are to be over five cities.’
And another came, saying, ‘Lord, behold your mina, which I kept lying away in a handkerchief.
For I was afraid of you, because you are a harsh man. You take up what you did not lay down, and you reap what you did not sow.’
He says to him, ‘Out of your mouth I will judge you, evil servant. You knew that I am a harsh man, taking up what I did not lay down and reaping what I did not sow?
Why then did you not give my money to the bank, and I having come, might have collected it with interest?’
And to those standing by he said, ‘Take from him the mina, and give it to the one having the ten minas.’
And they said to him, ‘Master, he has ten minas!’
‘I say to you that to everyone having will be given, but from the one not having, even that which he has will be taken away.
Furthermore, these enemies of mine, those not having been willing for me to reign over them, bring them here and slay them before me.’”
And having said these things He went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass as He drew near to Bethphage and Bethany, toward the mount called Olivet, He sent two of the disciples,
saying, “Go into the village ahead, in which entering you will find a colt having been tied, on which no one of men has ever yet sat; and having untied it, bring it.
And if anyone asks you, ‘Why do you untie it?’ thus will you say, ‘Because the Lord has need of it.’”
And having departed, those having been sent found it as He had said to them.
And on their untying the colt, its masters said to them, “Why do you untie the colt?”
And they said, “The Lord has need of it.”
And they led it to Jesus, and having cast their garments on the colt, they put Jesus on it.
And as He is going, they were spreading their garments on the road.
And as He is drawing near, already at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples rejoicing, began to praise God in a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen,
saying: “Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!”
And some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to Him, “Teacher, rebuke Your disciples.”
And answering He said, “I say to you that if these will be silent, the stones will cry out.”
And as He drew near, having seen the city, He wept over it,
saying, “If you had known in this day, even you, the things for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes.
For days will come upon you that your enemies will cast around you a barricade, and will surround you and will hem you in on every side.
And they will level you to the ground, and your children within you, and will not leave a stone upon a stone within you, because you did not know the season of your visitation.”
And having entered into the temple, He began to cast out those selling,
saying to them, “It has been written: ‘And My house will be a house of prayer.’ But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
And He was teaching every day in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the foremost of the people were seeking to destroy Him.
And they did not find what they might do; for all the people are listening, hanging on His words.
And it came to pass on one of the days He was teaching the people in the temple and proclaiming the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came up with the elders,
and spoke to Him, saying, “Tell us by what authority You do these things, or who is the one having given to You this authority?”
And answering, He said to them, “I also will ask you one thing, and you tell Me:
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?”
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, “If we should say ‘From heaven,’ He will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
But if we should say, ‘From men,’ all the people will stone us, for they are having been persuaded John to be a prophet.”
And they answered, they did not know from where.
And Jesus said to them, “Neither do I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
And He began to speak to the people this parable: “A certain man planted a vineyard, and rented it to farmers, and went abroad a long time.
And in the season, he sent a servant to the farmers, that they will give to him from the fruit of the vineyard. But the farmers sent him away empty-handed, having beaten him.
And he proceeded to send another servant; but having beaten him and having dishonored him, they sent him away empty-handed.
And he proceeded to send a third; and having wounded him also, they cast him out.
Then the master of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’
And having seen him, the farmers began reasoning among themselves, saying, ‘This is the heir; let us kill him, so that the inheritance might become ours.’
And having cast him forth outside the vineyard, they killed him. What therefore will the master of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and will destroy these farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.” And having heard it, they said, “Never may it be!”
But having looked at them, He said, “What then is this that has been written: ‘The stone which those building rejected, this has become into the head of the corner’?
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken, but on whomever it might fall, it will grind him into powder.”
And the scribes and the chief priests sought to lay hands on Him in that hour, and they feared the people. For they perceived that He was speaking this parable against them.
And having watched Him, they sent spies, feigning themselves to be righteous, that they might catch Him in His word, in order to deliver Him to the rule and to the authority of the governor.
And they questioned Him, saying, “Teacher, we know that You speak and teach rightly, and do not receive any person, but teach the way of God on the basis of truth.
Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or not?”
But having perceived their craftiness, He said to them,
“Show Me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” And they said, “Caesar’s.”
And He said to them, “Therefore give back to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God.”
And they were not able to catch Him in His word before the people. And having marveled at His answer, they became silent.
And some of the Sadducees, the ones denying there is a resurrection, having approached, questioned Him,
saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote to us if anyone’s brother should die having a wife, and he is childless, that his brother should take the wife and should raise up seed to his brother.
Therefore there were seven brothers. And the first, having taken a wife, died childless;
and the second
and the third took her; and likewise also the seven did not leave children and died.
Finally the woman also died.
Therefore in the resurrection, the woman, whose wife does she become? For the seven had her as wife.”
And Jesus said to them, “The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage.
But those having been considered worthy to obtain that which is to the age, and the resurrection which is from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage.
For neither are they able to die any more, for they are like the angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord ‘the God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob.’
Now He is not God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to Him.”
And some of the scribes answering, said, “Teacher, you have spoken well.”
And no longer did they dare to ask Him anything.
And He said to them, “How do they declare the Christ to be Son of David?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand,
until I place Your enemies, as a footstool of Your feet.”’
David therefore calls Him Lord, and how is He his son?”
While all the people were listening, He said to His disciples,
“Beware of the scribes, desiring to walk in long robes, and loving greetings in the marketplaces and first seats in the synagogues and first places in the banquets,
who devour the houses of widows, and pray at great length as a pretext. These will receive more abundant condemnation.”
And having looked up, He saw the rich casting their gifts into the treasury,
and He saw a certain poor widow casting in two lepta.
And He said, “Truly I say to you that this poor widow has cast in more than all of them.
For these all cast in gifts out of that which was abounding to them; but she, out of her poverty, did cast in all the livelihood that she had.”
And as some were speaking about the temple, that it was adorned with goodly stones and consecrated gifts, He said,
“As to these things which you are beholding, the days will come in which no stone will be left upon a stone, which will not be thrown down.”
And they asked Him, saying, “Teacher, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when these things are about to take place?”
And He said, “Take heed, lest you be led astray; for many will come in My name, saying, ‘I am He,’ and ‘The time is drawn near.’ Do not go after them.
And when you should hear of wars and commotions, do not be terrified; for it behooves these things to take place first, but the end is not immediately.”
Then He was saying to them, “Nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be both great earthquakes, and famines and pestilences in different places. There will also be fearful sights and great signs from heaven.
But before all these things, they will lay their hands upon you, and will persecute you, delivering you to the synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors on account of My name.
It will result to you for a testimony.
Settle therefore in your minds not to premeditate to make a defense.
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all those opposing you will not be able to resist nor to reply to.
And you will be betrayed even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put to death some from among you.
And you will be hated by all because of My name.
And no, not a hair of your head should perish.
By your patient endurance, you will gain your souls.
And when you see Jerusalem being encircled by encampments, then know that her desolation has drawn near.
Then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains; and those in her midst, let them depart out; and those in the countries, let them not enter into her.
For these are the days of avenging, to fulfill all things having been written.
But woe to those having in womb, and to the ones nursing in those days. For there will be great distress upon the land and wrath to this people.
And they will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trodden down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars; and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, sea roaring and surge rolling,
men fainting from fear and expectation of that which is coming on the earth. For the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then will they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory.
And of these things beginning to come to pass, look up and lift up your heads, because your redemption draws near.”
And He spoke to them a parable: “Behold the fig tree and all the trees.
When they sprout already, looking for yourselves, you know that already summer is near.
So also you, when you see these things coming to pass, know that the kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you that this generation will not have passed away until all shall have taken place.
The heaven and the earth will pass away, but My words will never pass away.
And take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts ever be burdened with dissipation and drunkenness and the cares of life—and that day would come upon you suddenly as a snare.
For it will come upon all those sitting upon the face of all the earth.
Watch also at every season, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that are about to come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man.”
And during the day He was teaching in the temple, and in the evening going out, He was lodging on the mount called Olivet.
And all the people would come to Him early in the morning in the temple, to hear Him.
And the Feast of Unleavened Bread, called Passover, was drawing near.
And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how the they might put Him to death; for they were afraid of the people.
And Satan entered into Judas the one being called Iscariot, being of the number of the Twelve.
And having gone away, he spoke with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray Him to them.
And they rejoiced and agreed to give him money.
And he promised, and began seeking opportunity to betray Him to them apart from a crowd.
And the day of Unleavened Bread came, on which it was necessary for the Passover lamb to be sacrificed.
And He sent Peter and John, having said, “Having gone, prepare the Passover for us, that we might eat it.”
And they said to Him, “Where do You desire we should prepare it?”
And He said to them, “Behold, of you having entered into the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him into the house into which he enters,
and you shall say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?”’
And he will show you a large furnished upper room. Prepare it there.”
And having gone, they found it as He had said to them, and they prepared the Passover.
And when the hour was come, He reclined, and the apostles with Him.
And He said to them, “With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
For I say to you that never again will I eat thereof, until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
And having received the cup, having given thanks, He said, “Take this and divide it among yourselves.
For I say to you that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine from now until the kingdom of God shall come.”
And having taken the bread, having given thanks, He broke it and gave to them, saying, “This is My body, which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me,”
and the cup likewise, after having supped, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood, which is being poured out for you.
But, behold, the hand of him betraying Me is with Me on the table.
For indeed the Son of Man goes according to that having been determined. But woe to that man by whom He is betrayed.”
And they began to question among themselves who then of them it might be who is about to do this.
And there was also a dispute among them which of them is thought to be the greatest.
And He said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles rule over them, and those exercising authority over them are called benefactors.
But you shall not be thus. Instead, the greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and the one leading, as the one serving.
For who is greater, the one reclining or the one serving? Is not the one reclining? But I am in your midst as the One serving.
Now you are those having remained with Me in My trials.
And I appoint to you a kingdom, as My Father appointed to Me,
so that you may eat and may drink at My table in My kingdom, and may sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have all of you to sift like wheat.
But I begged for you, that your faith may not fail. And you, when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers.”
And he said to Him, “Lord, I am ready to go with You both to prison and to death.”
And He said, “I tell you Peter, the rooster will not crow today until you will deny three times knowing Me.”
And He said to them, “When I sent you without purse and bag and sandals, did you lack anything?” And they said, “Nothing.”
And He said to them, “But now, the one having a purse, let him take it, and likewise a bag; and the one having no sword, let him sell his cloak and buy one.
For I say to you that this which has been written, it behooves to be accomplished in Me: ‘And He was reckoned with the lawless.’ For also the things concerning Me have an end.”
And they said, “Lord, behold, here are two swords.” And He said to them, “It is enough.”
And having gone forth, He went according to the custom to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed Him.
And having come to the place, He said to them, “Pray not to enter into temptation.”
And He withdrew from them about a stone’s throw, and having fallen on the knees, He was praying,
saying, “Father, if You are willing, take away this cup from Me. Yet not My will, but Yours be done.”
And an angel from heaven appeared to Him, strengthening Him.
And having been in agony, He was praying more earnestly. And His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down upon the ground.
And having risen up from the prayer, having come to the disciples, He found them sleeping from the grief.
And He said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Having risen up, pray that you might not enter into temptation.”
While He was still speaking, behold, a crowd, and he who is called Judas, one of the Twelve, was going before them, and drew near to Jesus to kiss Him.
And Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?”
And those around Him, having seen what would be, said, “Lord, should we strike with the sword?”
And a certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear.
And Jesus answering said, “Allow you thus far!” And having touched the ear, He healed him.
And Jesus said to those having come out against Him, the chief priests, and captains of the temple and elders, “Have you come out with swords and clubs as against a robber?
Every day of Me being with you in the temple, you did not stretch out the hands against Me; but this is your hour, and the power of the darkness.”
And having seized Him, they led Him away, and led Him into the house of the high priest. And Peter was following afar off.
And they having kindled a fire in the midst of the courtyard, and having sat down together, Peter was sitting among them.
And a certain servant girl, having seen him sitting by the light, and having looked intently on him, said, “This one also was with Him.”
But he denied it, saying, “Woman, I do not know Him.”
And after a little, having seen him, another was saying, “You also are of them.” But Peter was saying, “Man, I am not.”
And about one hour having elapsed, a certain other strongly affirmed it, saying, “Of a truth, this one also was with Him; for he is also a Galilean.”
But Peter said, “Man, I do not know what you say.” And immediately while he was speaking, the rooster crowed.
And having turned, the Lord looked at Peter, and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how He had said to him, “Before the rooster crows today, you will deny Me three times.”
And having gone forth outside, he wept bitterly.
And the men who are holding Him began mocking Him, beating Him.
And having blindfolded Him, they were questioning Him, saying, “Prophesy, who is the one having struck You?”
And they were saying many other things to Him, blaspheming.
And when it became day, the elderhood of the people were gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led Him into their council, saying,
“If You are the Christ, tell us.” And He said to them, “If I should tell you, you would not believe,
and if I should ask you, you would not answer.
But from now on the Son of Man will be sitting at the right hand of the power of God.”
And they all said, “Are You then the Son of God?” And He was saying to them, “You say that I am.”
And they said, “What need do we have of any more witness? For we ourselves have heard it from His mouth.”
And having risen up, all the multitude of them led Him to Pilate.
And they began to accuse Him, saying, “We found this man misleading our nation, and forbidding tribute to be given to Caesar, and declaring Himself to be Christ, a king.”
And Pilate questioned Him, saying, “Are You the King of the Jews?” And answering him, He was saying, “You say.”
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no guilt in this man.”
But they kept insisting, saying, “He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all of Judea, and He has begun from Galilee even to here.”
And Pilate having heard, asked whether the man is a Galilean,
and having learned that He is from the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent Him up to Herod, he himself being also in Jerusalem in those days.
And Herod, having seen Jesus, was exceedingly glad; for of a long time he is wishing to see Him, because of hearing concerning Him; and he was hoping to see some sign done by Him.
And He kept questioning Him in many words, but He answered him nothing.
And the chief priests and the scribes had been standing by, vehemently accusing Him.
And Herod, with his troops, having set Him at naught and also having mocked Him, having put on Him splendid apparel, sent Him back to Pilate.
And both Herod and Pilate became friends with one another on that day; for previously it had been that they were at enmity between themselves.
And Pilate, having called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
said to them, “You brought to me this man as one misleading the people; and behold, having examined Him before you, I found nothing in this man guilty of that accusation you are bringing against Him.
No, not even Herod did; for he sent Him back to us. And behold, nothing worthy of death is done by Him.
Therefore having chastised Him, I will release Him.”

But they cried out all together, saying, “Away with this man, and release to us Barabbas,”
who was one having been cast into the prison on account of a certain insurrection having been made in the city, and murder.
Therefore Pilate, wishing to release Jesus, called to them again.
But they were crying out, saying, “Crucify! Crucify Him!”
And he said to them a third time, “What evil indeed did this man commit? I found no cause of death in Him. Therefore having chastised Him, I will release Him.”
But they were urgent, asking with loud voices for Him to be crucified. And their voices were prevailing.
And Pilate sentenced their demand to be done.
And he released the one having been cast into prison on account of insurrection and murder, whom they had asked for; and Jesus he delivered to their will.
And as they led Him away, having laid hold on Simon, a certain man of Cyrene coming from the country, they put upon him the cross, to carry it behind Jesus.
And a great multitude of the people were following Him, and of women, who were mourning and lamenting for Him.
And having turned to them, Jesus said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for Me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
For behold, the days are coming in which they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never did bear, and breasts that never nursed.’
Then ‘they will begin to say to the mountains, “Fall upon us,” and to the hills, “Cover us.”’
For if they do these things in the green tree, what might take place in the dry?”
And two other criminals also were being led away to be put to death with Him.
And when they came to the place called The Skull, there they crucified Him, and the criminals, one on the right, and one on the left.
And Jesus was saying, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” And they cast lots, dividing His garments.
And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also were deriding Him, saying, “He saved others; let Him save Himself, if this is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
And the soldiers also mocked Him, coming near, offering Him sour wine,
and saying, “If You are the King of the Jews, save Yourself!”
And there was also this inscription over Him: The King of the Jews.
And one of the criminals having been hanged was railing at Him, saying, “Are You not the Christ? Save Yourself and us!”
And the other answering, was rebuking him, saying, “Do you not even fear God, that you are under the same judgment,
and we indeed justly? For we are receiving things worthy of what we did, but this man did nothing wrong.”
And he was saying, “Jesus, remember me when You come into Your kingdom!”
And He said to him, “Truly I say to you, today you will be with Me in Paradise.”
And now it was about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.
The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn in the middle.
And having called out in a loud voice, Jesus said, “Father, into Your hands I commit My Spirit.” And having said this, He breathed His last.
And having seen that which had taken place, the centurion began glorifying God, saying, “Certainly this man was righteous.”
And all the crowds having come together to this spectacle, having seen the things that had taken place, were returning home, beating the breasts.
And all from those who knew Him, and women, those having followed Him from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.
And behold, a man named Joseph, being also a Council member, a good and righteous man—
he was not having consented to their counsel and deed—from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, who was waiting for the kingdom of God.
He having gone to Pilate, asked for the body of Jesus.
And having taken it down, he wrapped it in a linen cloth and placed it in a tomb cut in a rock, in which no one yet had been laid.
And it was the Day of Preparation, and Sabbath was just beginning.
And the women who were come with Him out of Galilee, having followed, saw the tomb and how His body was laid.
And having returned, they prepared spices and anointing oils. And they rested indeed on the Sabbath according to the commandment.
But the first day of the week, very early morning, they came to the tomb, bringing the spices that they had prepared,
and they found the stone having been rolled away from the tomb.
But having entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
And it came to pass that while they are perplexed about this, behold, two men in dazzling garments stood by them;
and of them having become terrified and bowing the faces to the ground, they said to them, “Why do you seek the living among the dead?
He is not here, but He is risen! Remember how He spoke to you, being yet in Galilee,
saying, ‘It behooves the Son of Man to be delivered into hands of sinful men, and to be crucified, and the third day to arise.’”
And they remembered His words.
And having returned from the tomb, they related all these things to the eleven and to all the rest.
Now it was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them, who were telling these things to the apostles.
And their words appeared before them like folly, and they did not believe them.
But Peter having risen up, ran to the tomb, and having stooped down, he sees only the linen strips. And he went away, wondering in himself at that having come to pass.
And behold, on the same day, two of them were going to a village whose name is Emmaus, sixty stadia distant from Jerusalem.
And they were talking with one another about all these things having taken place.
And it came to pass, in their talking and reasoning, that Jesus Himself, having drawn near, was walking along with them.
But their eyes were held not to know Him.
And He said to them, “What are these words that you exchange with one another, walking?” And they stood still, looking sad.
And the one named Cleopas, answering, said to Him, “Are You alone visiting Jerusalem and have not known the things having come to pass in it in these days?”
And He said to them, “What things?” And they said to Him, “The things concerning Jesus of Nazareth, a man who was a prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the people,
and that our chief priests and rulers delivered Him up to the judgment of death, and crucified Him.
But we were hoping it is He who is about to redeem Israel. But indeed also with all these things, this brings the third day away from which these things came to pass.
But also, certain women out from us astonished us. Having been to the tomb early
and not having found His body, they came declaring to have also seen a vision of angels, who say He is alive.
And some of those with us went to the tomb and found it just as the women also said. But Him they did not see.”
And He said to them, “O foolish and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken.
Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into His glory?”
And having begun from Moses and from all the Prophets, He interpreted to them the things concerning Himself in all the Scriptures.
And they drew near to the village where they were going, and He appeared to be going farther.
And they constrained Him, saying, “Abide with us, for it is toward evening, and now the day has declined.” And He entered in to abide with them.
And it came to pass in His reclining with them, having taken the bread, He blessed it; and having broken it, He began giving it to them.
And their eyes were opened, and they knew Him. And He being seen, vanished from them.
And they said to one another, “Was not our heart burning within us as He was speaking with us on the road, as He was opening the Scriptures to us?”
And having risen up that same hour, they returned to Jerusalem, and they found the eleven and those with them gathered together,
saying, “The Lord has risen indeed, and He has appeared to Simon.”
And they began relating the things on the road, and how He was known to them in the breaking of the bread.
And as they were telling these things, He Himself stood in their midst, and says to them, “Peace to you.”
But having been terrified, and having been filled with fear, they were thinking themselves to see a spirit.
And He said to them, “Why are you troubled, and why do doubts come up in your hearts?
See My hands and My feet, that I am He. Touch Me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones, as you see Me having.”
And having said this, He showed to them the hands and the feet.
And while they still were disbelieving for joy and were wondering, He said to them, “Have you anything here to eat?”
And they gave to Him part of a broiled fish.
And having taken it, He ate it before them.
And He said unto to them, “These are my words, which I spoke to you being still with you, that all things having been written concerning Me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms, it behooves to be fulfilled.”
Then He opened their mind to understand the Scriptures.
And He said to them, “Thus it has been written: The Christ was to suffer and to rise out from the dead on the third day,
and repentance and forgiveness of sins to be proclaimed in His name to all nations, having begun from Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of these things.
And behold, I am sending the promise of My Father upon you. But you, remain in the city until that you should be clothed with power from on high.”
And He led them out as far as to Bethany, and having lifted up His hands, He blessed them.
And it came to pass in His blessing them, He was separated from them and was carried up into heaven.
And they having worshiped Him, returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and were continually in the temple, blessing God.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
He was in the beginning with God.
All things came into being through Him, and without Him not even one thing came into being that has come into being.
In Him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the Light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
There came a man having been sent from God. His name was John.
He came as a witness, that he might testify concerning the Light, that all might believe through him.
He was not the Light, but came that he might witness concerning the Light.
The true Light who enlightens every man was coming into the world.
He was in the world, and the world came into being through Him, and the world did not know Him.
He came to the own, and the own did not receive Him.
But as many as received Him, He gave to them authority to be children of God—to those believing in His name,
who were born not of blood, nor of will of flesh, nor of will of man, but of God.
And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us. And we beheld His glory, a glory as of an only begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John witnesses concerning Him, and he cried out, saying, “This was He of whom I was saying, ‘The One coming after me has precedence over me, because He was before me.’”
For from His fullness, we have all received and grace upon grace.
For the Law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
No one has ever yet seen God. The only begotten God, the One being in the bosom of the Father, He has made Him known.
And this is the testimony of John when the Jews sent to him priests and Levites from Jerusalem, that they might ask him, “Who are you?”
And he confessed and did not deny, but confessed, “I am not the Christ.”
And they asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” And he says, “I am not.” “Are you the prophet?” And he answered, “No.”
Therefore they said to him, “Who are you, that we might give an answer to those having sent us? What do you say about yourself?”
He was saying, “I am a voice crying in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’” as Isaiah the prophet said.
And those having been sent were of the Pharisees,
and they asked him and said to him, “Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?”
John answered them saying, “I baptize with water, but in the midst of you stands One whom you do not know,
the One coming after me, of whom am I not worthy that I should untie the strap of His sandal.”
These things took place in Bethany, across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
On the next day, he sees Jesus coming to him and says, “Behold the Lamb of God, the One taking away the sin of the world.
This is He concerning whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who has precedence over me, because He was before me.’
And I did not know Him. But so that He might be revealed to Israel, because of this, I came baptizing with water.”
And John bore witness saying, “I have beheld the Spirit descending as a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon Him.
And I did not know Him; but the One having sent me to baptize with water, He said to me, ‘Upon whom you shall see the Spirit descending and abiding on Him, He is the One baptizing with the Holy Spirit.’
And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.”
On the next day John again was standing, and two of his disciples.
And having looked at Jesus walking, he says, “Behold the Lamb of God!”
And the two disciples heard him speaking, and followed Jesus.
Then Jesus having turned and having beheld them following, says to them, “What do you seek?” And they said to Him, “Rabbi” (which being translated is to say Teacher), “where are You staying?”
He says to them, “Come, and you will see.” So they went and saw where He abides, and they stayed with Him that day. It was about the tenth hour.
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two having heard from John and having followed Him.
He first finds the own brother Simon and says to him, “We have found the Messiah” (which is translated Christ).
He led him to Jesus. Having looked at him, Jesus said, “You are Simon the son of Jonah. You will be called Cephas” (which means Peter).
On the next day He desired to go forth into Galilee. And He finds Philip. And Jesus says to him, “Follow Me.”
Now Philip was from Bethsaida, from the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip Finds Nathanael and says to him, “We have found Him whom Moses wrote of in the Law, also the prophets, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
And Nathanael said to him, “Is any good thing able to be out of Nazareth?” Philip says to him, “Come and see.”
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him, and He says concerning him, “Behold, truly an Israelite, in whom there is no deceit.”
Nathanael says to Him, “From where do You know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip calling you, you being under the fig tree, I saw you.”
Nathanael answered Him, “Rabbi, You are the Son of God; You are King of Israel.”
Jesus answered and said to him, “Because I said to you that I saw you under the fig tree, do you believe? You will see greater things than these.”
And He says to him, “Truly, truly, I say to all of you, you will see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”
And on the third day a wedding took place in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there,
and also Jesus was invited, and His disciples, to the wedding.
And of the wine having been deficient, the mother of Jesus says to Him, “They have no wine.”
And Jesus says to her, “What to Me and to you, woman? My hour is not yet come.”
His mother says to the servants, “Whatever He may say to you, do it.”
Now there were six stone water jars standing there, according to the purification of the Jews, having space for two or three metretae.
Jesus says to them, “Fill the jars with water.” And they filled them up to the brim.
And He says to them, “Now draw some out and carry it to the master of the feast.” And they carried it.
And when the master of the feast had tasted the water having become wine, and did not know from where it is—but the servants having drawn the water knew—the master of the feast calls the bridegroom,
and he says to him, “Every man first sets out the good wine, and when they might have drunk freely, the inferior; you have kept the good wine until now.”
This was the beginning of the signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and He revealed His glory. And His disciples believed in Him.
After this, He went down to Capernaum, He and His mother, and His brothers, and His disciples, and they stayed there not many days.
And the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And He found in the temple those selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the money changers sitting.
And having made a whip of cords, He drove out all from the temple, both sheep and oxen; and He poured out the coins of the money changers and overthrew the tables.
And to those selling doves He said, “Take these things from here! Do not make My Father’s house a house of trade.”
His disciples remembered that it is written: “The zeal of Your house will consume Me.”
So the Jews answered and said to Him, “What sign do You show to us that You do these things?”
Jesus answered and said to them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
Therefore the Jews said, “This temple was built in forty and six years, and You will raise it up in three days?”
But He was speaking concerning the temple of His body.
Therefore when He was raised up out from the dead, His disciples remembered that He had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.
And when He was in Jerusalem in the Passover, in the Feast, many believed in His name, beholding His signs that He was doing.
But Jesus on His part did not did entrust Himself to them, because of His knowing all men,
and because He had no need that anyone should testify concerning man, for He Himself knew what was in man.
And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
He came to Him by night and said to Him, “Rabbi, we know that You have come from God as a teacher, for no one is able to do these signs that You do, unless God should be with him.”
Jesus answered and said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, except anyone be born from above, he is not able to see the kingdom of God.”
Nicodemus says to Him, “How is a man able to be born, being old? Is he able to enter into the womb of his mother a second time, and to be born?”
Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless anyone be born of water and of the Spirit, he is not able to enter into the kingdom of God.
That having been born of the flesh is flesh, and that having been born of the Spirit is spirit.
Do not wonder that I said to you, ‘It is necessary for you all to be born from above.’
The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know from where it comes and where it goes. Thus is everyone having been born of the Spirit.”
Nicodemus answered and said to Him, “How are these things able to be?”
Jesus answered and said to him, “You are the teacher of Israel, and do you not know these things?
Truly, truly, I say to you that we speak that which we know, and we bear witness to that which we have seen, and you people do not receive our witness.
If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
And no one has gone up into heaven except the One having come down out of heaven, the Son of Man.
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus it behooves the Son of Man to be lifted up,
so that everyone believing in Him may have eternal life.
For God so loved the world that He gave the only begotten Son, so that everyone believing in Him should not perish, but should have eternal life.
For God did not send His Son into the world that He might judge the world, but that the world might be saved through Him.
The one believing in Him is not judged, but the one not believing already has been judged, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
And this is the judgement, that the Light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the Light; for their deeds were evil.
For everyone practicing evil hates the Light and does not come to the Light, so that his works may not be exposed;
but the one practicing the truth comes to the Light, that his works may be manifest as having been done in God.”
After these things, Jesus and His disciples came into the land of Judea, and there He was staying with them, and was baptizing.
Now John was also baptizing in Aenon, near Salim, because the waters were many there, and they were coming and being baptized.
For John had not yet been cast into the prison.
Then a debate arose among the disciples of John with a certain Jew about purification.
And they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, He who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have borne witness, behold He baptizes, and all are coming to Him.”
John answered and said, “A man is able to receive not one thing if it is not given to him from heaven.
You yourselves bear witness to me that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but I am sent before Him.’
The one having the bride is the bridegroom; and the friend of the bridegroom, the one standing and listening for him, rejoices with joy because of the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore, this joy of mine is fulfilled.
It behooves Him to increase, but me to decrease.
The One coming from above is above all. The one being from the earth is from the earth, and speaks from the earth. The One coming from heaven is above all.
What He has seen and heard, this He testifies, but no one receives His testimony.
The one having received His testimony has set his seal that God is true.
For He whom God sent speaks the words of God, for He gives the Spirit without measure.
The Father loves the Son and has given all things into His hand.
The one believing in the Son has eternal life, but the one not obeying the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.”
Therefore when Jesus knew that Pharisees heard that Jesus makes and baptizes more disciples than John
(although indeed Jesus Himself was not baptizing, but His disciples),
He left Judea and went away again into Galilee.
And it was necessary for Him to pass through Samaria.
Therefore He comes to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of ground that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
And Jacob’s well was there. Therefore Jesus, being wearied from the journey, thus was sitting at the well. The hour was about the sixth.
A woman out of Samaria comes to draw water. Jesus says to her, “Give Me to drink.”
For His disciples had gone away into the city, that they might buy food.
Therefore the Samaritan woman says to Him, “How do You, being a Jew, ask drink from me, being a Samaritan woman?” For Jews have no association with Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said to her, “If you had known the gift of God and who it is saying to you, ‘Give Me to drink,’ you would have asked Him, and He would have given to you living water.”
The woman says to Him, “Sir, You have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep; from where then do You have the living water?
Are You greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and drank of it himself, and his sons, and his livestock?”
Jesus answered and said to her, “Everyone drinking of this water will thirst again;
but whoever may drink of the water that I will give him will never thirst, to the age. Instead, the water that I will give to him will become in him a spring of water, welling up into eternal life.”
The woman says to Him, “Sir, give me this water, that I might not thirst, nor come here to draw water.”
He says to her, “Go, call your husband, and come here.”
The woman answered and said to Him, “I do not have a husband.” Jesus says to her, “You have spoken correctly, ‘I do not have a husband.’
For you have had five husbands, and he whom you have now is not your husband; this you have spoken truly.”
The woman says to Him, “Sir, I understand that You are a prophet.
Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and you say that in Jerusalem is the place where it is necessary to worship.”
Jesus says to her, “Believe Me, woman, that an hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.
You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews.
But an hour is coming and now is, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth; for the Father also seeks such who worship Him.
God is Spirit, and it behooves those worshiping Him to worship in spirit and truth.”
The woman says to Him, “I know that Messiah is coming, who is called Christ; when He comes, He will tell us all things.”
Jesus says to her, “I who am speaking to you am He.”
And upon this, His disciples came and were amazed that He was speaking with a woman. But no one said, “What do You seek?” Or “Why do You speak with her?”
Then the woman left her water pot and went away into the city, and says to the men,
“Come, see a man who told me all things I ever did. Can it be that this is the Christ?”
They went forth out of the city and were coming unto Him.
But in the meantime the disciples were asking Him, saying, “Rabbi, eat.”
But He said to them, “I have food to eat that you do not know.”
Therefore the disciples were saying to one another, “No one brought Him anything to eat?”
Jesus says to them, “My food is that I should do the will of the One having sent Me, and should finish His work.
Do you not say that it is yet four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes and see the fields, because they are already white toward harvest!
The one reaping receives a reward and gathers fruit unto eternal life, so that the one sowing and the one reaping may rejoice together.
For in this, the saying is true, that is, ‘One is sowing, and another is reaping.’
I sent you to reap what you have not toiled for; others have toiled, and you have entered into their labor.”
And out of that city, many of the Samaritans believed in Him, because of the word of the woman testifying, “He told me all things I ever did.”
Therefore when the Samaritans came to Him, they were asking Him to abide with them, and He stayed there two days.
And many more believed because of His word.
And they were saying to the woman, “No longer because of your speech do we believe; for we ourselves have heard, and we know that this is truly the Savior of the world.”
And after the two days, He went forth from there into Galilee.
For Jesus Himself testified that a prophet has no honor in the own hometown.
Therefore when He came into Galilee, the Galileans received Him, having seen the greatness of all the things He had done in Jerusalem during the feast, for they themselves also had gone to the feast.
Therefore He came again to Cana of Galilee, where He had made the water wine. And there was in Capernaum a certain royal official whose son was sick.
Having heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to Him and was asking that He would come down and heal his son; for he was about to die.
Therefore Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will never believe.”
The royal official says to Him, “Sir, come down before my child dies.”
Jesus says to him, “Go, your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus said to him, and he went on his way.
And already as he is going down, his servants met him, saying that his son lives.
Therefore he inquired from them the hour in which he got better. Therefore they said to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.”
Therefore the father knew that it was in that hour at which Jesus said to him, “Your son lives.” And he himself believed, and his whole household.
This is now again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.
After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now there is in Jerusalem by the Sheep Gate a pool, in Hebrew called Bethesda, having five porches.
In these were lying a multitude of those ailing, blind, lame, paralyzed.

And a certain man was there, himself being thirty and eight years in infirmity.
Jesus, having seen him lying and having known that he has been a long time already, says to him, “Do you desire to become well?”
The one ailing answered Him, “Sir, I do not have a man, that when the water has been stirred, he might put me into the pool; and while I am going, another descends before me.”
Jesus says to him, “Arise, take up your mat, and walk.”
And immediately the man became well, and he took up his mat and began to walk. And it was the Sabbath on that day.
Therefore the Jews were saying to the one having been healed, “It is the Sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to take up your mat.”
But he answered them, “The One having made me well, that One said to me ‘Take up your mat and walk.’”
Therefore they asked him, “Who is the man having said to you, ‘Take it up and walk’?”
And the one having been healed did not know who it is, for Jesus had moved away, a crowd being in the place.
After these things Jesus finds him in the temple and said to him, “Behold, you have become well. Sin no more, that something worse should not happen to you.”
The man went away and told the Jews that Jesus is the One having made him well.
And because of this, the Jews were persecuting Jesus, because He was doing these things on the Sabbath.
But Jesus answered them, “My Father is working until now, and I am working.”
Therefore because of this, the Jews were seeking the more to kill Him, because not only was He breaking the Sabbath, but also He was calling God His own Father, making Himself equal to God.
Therefore Jesus answered and was saying to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son is able to do nothing of Himself, if not anything He may see the Father doing; for whatever He does, these things also the Son does likewise.
For the Father loves the Son and shows to Him all things that He does. And He will show Him greater works than these, so that you may marvel.
For even as the Father raises up the dead and gives life, thus also the Son gives life to whom He will.
For the Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son,
so that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He who is not honoring the Son is not honoring the Father, the One having sent Him.
Truly, truly, I say to you that the one hearing My word and believing the One having sent Me, he has eternal life and does not come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life.
Truly, truly, I say to you that an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those having heard will live.
For as the Father has life in Himself, so also He gave to the Son to have life in Himself.
And He gave Him authority to execute judgment, because He is the Son of Man.
Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming in which all those in the tombs will hear His voice,
and will come forth—those having done good to the resurrection of life, and those having done evil to the resurrection of judgment.
I am able to do nothing of Myself. As I hear, I judge; and My judgment is just, because I do not seek My will, but the will of the One having sent Me.
If I bear witness concerning Myself, My testimony is not true.
It is another bearing witness concerning Me, and I know that the testimony which he bears witness concerning Me is true.
You have sent unto John, and he has borne witness to the truth.
And I do not receive testimony from man, but I say these things that you may be saved.
He was the lamp burning and shining, and you were willing to rejoice for a season in his light.
But I have testimony greater than that of John. For the works that the Father has given Me that I should complete them, the same works which I do, bear witness concerning Me that the Father has sent Me.
And the One having sent Me, the Father Himself, has borne witness concerning Me. You have neither heard His voice at any time, nor have you seen His form.
And you do not have His word abiding in you, for you do not believe Him whom He sent.
You diligently search the Scriptures because you think to have eternal life in them, and these are they bearing witness concerning Me;
and you are not willing to come to Me, that you may have life.
I do not take glory from men,
but I have known you, that you do not have the love of God in yourselves.
I have come in My Father’s name, and you do not receive Me; if another should come in the own name, you will receive him.
How are you able to believe, receiving glory from one another, and you do not seek the glory that is from the only God?
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one accusing you: Moses, in whom you have hoped.
For if you were believing Moses, you would have believed Me; for he wrote concerning Me.
And unless you believe his writings, how will you believe My words?”
After these things Jesus went away, over the Sea of Galilee (of Tiberias),
and a great crowd was following Him because they were seeing the signs which He was doing upon those being sick.
Now Jesus went up on the mountain and was sitting there with His disciples.
Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
Then Jesus, having lifted up the eyes and having seen that a great crowd is coming to Him, says to Philip, “From where shall we buy bread that these might eat?”
Now He was saying this testing him, for He knew what He was about to do.
Philip answered Him, “Two hundred denarii worth of loaves are not sufficient for them, that each might receive one little piece.”
One of His disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, says to Him,
“Here is a little boy who has five barley loaves and two small fish, but what are these for so many?”
Jesus said, “Make the men to recline.” Now there was much grass in the place; therefore the men reclined, about five thousand in number.
And Jesus took the loaves, and having given thanks, He distributed to those reclining; likewise also of the fish, as much as they wished.
Now when they were filled, He says to His disciples, “Gather together the fragments having been over and above, so that not anything may be lost.”
So they gathered them together and filled twelve hand-baskets of fragments from the five barley loaves, which were over and above to those having eaten.
Therefore the people, having seen what sign He had done, were saying, “This is truly the prophet who is coming into the world.”
Therefore Jesus, having known that they are about to come and to seize Him that they might make Him king, withdrew again to the mountain Himself alone.
Now when it became evening, His disciples went down to the sea,
and having entered into a boat, they were going over the sea to Capernaum. And already it had become dark, and Jesus had not come to them.
The sea was agitated and a strong wind is blowing.
Therefore, having rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they see Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were frightened.
Now He says to them, “I am He; do not fear.”
Then they were willing to receive Him into the boat, and immediately the boat was at the land to which they were going.
On the next day, the crowd standing on the other side of the sea, having seen that no other boat was there except one, and that Jesus did not go with His disciples into the boat, but His disciples went away alone
(but other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they ate the bread, the Lord having given thanks),
therefore when the crowd saw that Jesus is not there, nor His disciples, they themselves entered into the boats and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
And having found Him on the other side of the sea, they said to Him, “Rabbi, when have You come here?”
Jesus answered them and said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you seek Me not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves and were satisfied.
Do not work for the food that is perishing, but for the food enduring unto eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you; for God the Father has sealed Him.”
Therefore they said to Him, “What must we do, that we may be doing the works of God?”
Jesus answered and said to them, “This is the work of God, that you should believe in Him whom He has sent.”
Therefore they said to Him, “Then what sign are You doing, that we may see and may believe You? What work do You perform?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it is written: ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
Therefore Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, Moses has not given you the bread from heaven, but My Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is the One coming out of heaven and giving life to the world.”
Therefore they said to Him, “Sir, always give to us this bread.”
Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; the one coming to Me never shall hunger, and the one believing in Me never shall thirst at any time.
But I said to you that you have also seen Me, and yet do not believe.
All that the Father gives Me will come to Me, and the one coming to Me, I shall not cast out.
For I have come down from heaven, not that I should do My will, but the will of the One having sent Me.
Now this is the will of the One having sent Me, that all that He has given Me, I should lose none of it, but will raise it up in the last day.
For this is the will of My Father, that everyone beholding the Son and believing in Him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up in the last day.”
Therefore the Jews were grumbling about Him because He said, “I am the bread having come down from heaven.”
And they were saying, “Is this not Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does He say, ‘I have come down from heaven?’”
Jesus answered and said to them, “Do not grumble with one another.
No one is able to come to Me unless the Father, the one having sent Me, draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.
It is written in the prophets: ‘And they will all be taught of God.’ Everyone having heard from the Father and having learned, comes to Me.
Not that anyone has seen the Father, except the One being from God; He has seen the Father.
Truly, truly, I say to you, the one believing has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and died.
This is the bread coming down from heaven, that anyone may eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread, having come down from heaven. If anyone shall have eaten of this bread, he will live to the age. And also, the bread that I will give for the life of the world is My flesh.”
Therefore the Jews were arguing with one another, saying, “How is this man able to give us His flesh to eat?”
Therefore Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of Man, and shall have drunk His blood, you do not have life in yourselves.
The one eating My flesh and drinking My blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up in the last day.
For My flesh is true food, and My blood is true drink.
The one eating My flesh and drinking My blood abides in Me, and I in him.
As the living Father sent Me and I live because of the Father, so also the one feeding on Me, he also will live because of Me.
This is the bread having come down from heaven, not as the fathers ate and died. The one eating this bread will live to the age.”
He said these things teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.
Therefore many of His disciples having heard, said, “This word is difficult; who is able to hear it?”
But Jesus, knowing in Himself that His disciples are grumbling about this, said to them, “Does this offend you?
Then what if you should see the Son of Man ascending to where He was before?
It is the Spirit giving life; the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit and they are life.
But there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus knew from the beginning who are those not believing, and who it is who will betray Him.)
And He was saying, “Because of this, I have said to you that no one is able to come to Me, unless it shall have been granted to him from the Father.”
From that time, many of His disciples departed to the back and no longer walked with Him.
Therefore Jesus said to the Twelve, “You are not wishing to go away also?”
Simon Peter answered Him, “Lord, to whom will we go? You have the words of eternal life.
And we have believed and have known that You are the Holy One of God.”
Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you, the Twelve? And one of you is a devil!”
Now He was speaking of Judas son of Simon Iscariot; for he, one of the Twelve, was about to betray Him.
And after these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee; for He did not desire to walk in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill Him.
Now the feast of the Jews, that of Booths, was near.
Therefore His brothers said to Him, “Depart from here and go into Judea, so that Your disciples will also see Your works that You are doing.
For no one does anything in secret, and himself seeks to be in public. If You do these things, show Yourself to the world.”
For not even His brothers were believing in Him.
Therefore Jesus says to them, “My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready.
The world is not able to hate you; but it hates Me, because I bear witness concerning it that its works are evil.
You go up to the feast. I am not going up to this feast, for My time has not yet been fulfilled.”
Now having said these things to them, He remained in Galilee.
But when His brothers had gone up to the feast, then He also went up—not openly, but as in secret.
Therefore the Jews were seeking Him at the feast, and were saying, “Where is He?”
And there was much murmuring about Him among the crowds. For some were saying, “He is good.” But others were saying, “No, but He deceives the people.”
But no one was speaking publicly about Him, because of the fear of the Jews.
And of the feast now being in the middle, Jesus went up into the temple and was teaching.
Then the Jews were marveling, saying, “How does this one know such writings, not having studied?”
Therefore Jesus answered them and said, “My teaching is not of Myself, but of the One having sent Me.
If anyone desires to do His will, he will know concerning the teaching, whether it is from God, or I speak from Myself.
The one speaking from himself seeks the own glory, but the One seeking the glory of the One having sent Him, He is true, and no unrighteousness is in Him.
Has not Moses given to you the Law, and none of you keeps the Law? Why do you seek to kill Me?”
The crowd answered, “You have a demon. Who seeks to kill You?”
Jesus answered and said to them, “I did one work, and you all marvel.
Because of the fact that Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers) also on the Sabbath you circumcise a man.
If a man receives circumcision on the Sabbath so that the Law of Moses might not be broken, are you angry with Me because I made a man entirely sound on the Sabbath?
Do not judge according to appearance, but judge the righteous judgment.”
Therefore some of those of Jerusalem were saying, “Is this not whom they seek to kill?
And behold, He speaks publicly, and they say nothing ever to Him. Have the rulers truly recognized that this is the Christ?
But we know this man, where He is from. But the Christ, whenever He may come, no one knows where He is from.”
Therefore Jesus cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, “You know Me and you know where I am from. And I have not come of Myself, but the One having sent Me is true, whom you do not know.
But I know Him, because I am from Him, and He sent Me.”
Therefore they were seeking to take Him, but no one laid the hand upon Him, because His hour had not yet come.
Yet many out of the crowd believed in Him and were saying, “When the Christ comes, will He do more signs than this man has done?”
The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about Him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers, that they might seize Him.
Therefore Jesus said, “Yet a little time I am with you, and I go to the One having sent Me.
You will seek Me and will not find Me; and where I am, you are not able to come.”
Therefore the Jews said among themselves, “Where is He about to go that we will not find Him? Is He about to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and to teach the Greeks?
What is this word that He said, ‘You will seek Me, and will not find Me,’ and ‘Where I am you are not able to come’?”
Now in the last day of the feast, the great day, Jesus stood and cried out, saying, “If anyone thirsts, let him come to Me and drink.
The one believing in Me, as the Scripture has said: ‘Out of his belly will flow rivers of living water.’”
Now He said this concerning the Spirit, whom those having believed in Him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Therefore having heard these words, some of the people were saying, “This is truly the Prophet.”
Others were saying, “This is the Christ.” But others were saying, “Surely the Christ does not come out of Galilee?
Has not the Scripture said that Christ comes out of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?”
Therefore a division occurred in the crowd because of Him.
Now some of them desired to seize Him, but no one laid the hands on Him.
Therefore the officers came to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, “Why did you not bring Him?”
The officers answered, “Never has a man spoken like this, as this man speaks.”
Therefore the Pharisees answered them, “Have you also been deceived?
Has any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on Him?
But this crowd, not knowing the Law, are accursed.”
Nicodemus, the one having come to Him, the former being one of them, says to them,
“Does our Law judge the man unless first it has heard from him and known what he does?”
They answered and said to him, “Are you not also from Galilee? Search and see that a prophet is not raised out of Galilee.”
And each went to his home.
But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
And early in the morning again He came into the temple, and all the people were coming to Him. And having sat down, He was teaching them.
Now the scribes and the Pharisees bring to Him a woman having been caught in adultery, and having set her in the midst,
they say to Him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act, committing adultery.
Now in the Law Moses commanded us such to be stoned. You therefore, what do You say?”
Now they were saying this testing Him, so that they might have grounds to accuse Him. But Jesus, having stooped down, began writing with His finger on the ground.
But as they continued asking Him, having lifted Himself up, also He said to them, “The one sinless among you, let him cast the first stone at her.”
And again having stooped down, He continued to write on the ground.
And having heard, they began to go away one by one, having begun from the elder ones until the last, and He was left alone, Jesus and the woman being in the midst.
And having lifted up, Jesus said to her, “Woman where are they who accuse you? Has no one condemned you?”
And she said, “No one, Sir.” And to her Jesus said, “Neither I do condemn you. Go and sin no more from now on.”
Therefore Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. The one following Me shall not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life.”
Therefore the Pharisees said to Him, “You are bearing witness concerning Yourself; Your testimony is not true.”
Jesus answered and said to them, “Even if I am bearing witness concerning Myself, My testimony is true, because I know from where I came and where I am going. But you do not know from where I come or where I am going.
You judge according to the flesh; I am judging no one.
But even if I judge, My judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father, having sent Me.
But also in your Law it has been written that the testimony of two men is true.
I am One bearing witness concerning Myself, and the Father having sent Me bears witness concerning Me.”
Therefore they were saying to Him, “Where is Your Father?” Jesus answered, “You know neither Me nor My Father. If you had known Me, you would have known My Father also.”
He spoke these words in the treasury, teaching in the temple; and no one seized Him, for His hour had not yet come.
Then He said to them again, “I am going away and you will seek Me, and you will die in your sin. Where I go, you are not able to come.”
Therefore the Jews were saying, “Will He kill Himself, that He says, ‘Where I go, you are not able to come’?”
And He was saying to them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world.
Therefore I said to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you believe that I am He, you will die in your sins.”
Therefore they were saying to Him, “Who are You?” Jesus said to them, “Just what I am saying to you from the beginning.
I have many things to say and to judge concerning you. But the One having sent Me is true; and I what I have heard from Him, these things I say to the world.”
They did not understand that He was speaking to them about the Father.
Therefore Jesus said to them, “When you shall have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am He, and I do nothing from Myself; but as the Father taught Me, I speak these things.
And the One having sent Me is with Me. He has not left Me alone, because I always do the things pleasing to Him.”
Of His speaking these things, many believed in Him.
Therefore Jesus was saying to the Jews having believed in Him, “If you abide in My word, you are truly My disciples.
And you will know the truth, and the truth will set free you.”
They answered unto Him, “We are Abraham’s seed, and to no one ever have we been under bondage. How do You say, ‘You will become free’?”
Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you that everyone practicing the sin is a slave of the sin.
Now the slave does not abide in the house to the age; the son abides to the age.
So if the Son shall set you free, you will be free indeed.
I know that you are Abraham’s seed; but you seek to kill Me because My word receives no place in you.
I speak that which I have seen with the Father; therefore you also do what you have heard from your father.”
They answered and said to Him, “Abraham is our father.” Jesus says to them, “If you were children of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham.
But now you seek to kill Me, a man who has spoken to you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.
You are doing the works of your father.” Therefore they said to Him, “We have not been born of sexual immorality. We have one Father, God.”
Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would have loved Me, for I came forth from God and am here; for not even have I come of Myself, but He sent Me.
Why do you not understand My speech? Because you are not able to hear My word.
You are of your father the devil, and you desire to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and has not stood in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Whenever he might speak falsehood, he speaks from the own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.
Now because I speak the truth, you do not believe Me!
Which of you convicts me concerning sin? If I speak the truth, why do you not believe Me?
He who is of God hears the words of God; because of this, you do not hear, because you are not of God.”
The Jews answered and said to Him, “Are we not rightly saying that You are a Samaritan and have a demon?”
Jesus answered, “I do not have a demon, but I honor My Father, and you dishonor Me.
Yet I do not seek My glory; there is One seeking it and judging.
Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps My word, he shall never see death, to the age.”
Therefore the Jews said to Him, “Now we know that You have a demon. Abraham and the prophets died, and You say, ‘If anyone keeps My word, he shall never taste of death, to the age.’
Are You greater than our father Abraham, who died? And the prophets died! Whom do You make yourself?”
Jesus answered, “If I glorify Myself, My glory is nothing; it is My Father glorifying Me, of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’
And you have not known Him, but I know Him. And if I say that I do not know Him, I will be a liar like you. But I know Him, and I keep His word.
Abraham your father rejoiced in that he should see My day—and he saw it and rejoiced.”
Therefore the Jews said to Him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and You have seen Abraham?”
Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.”
Therefore they took up stones, that they might cast at Him; but Jesus hid Himself, and went forth out of the temple.
And passing by, He saw a man blind from birth.
And His disciples asked Him, saying, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born blind?”
Jesus answered, “Neither this man sinned, nor his parents; but it was that the works of God should be displayed in him.
It behooves us to work the works of the One having sent Me while it is day; night is coming, when no one is able to work.
While I shall be in the world, I am the light of the world.”
Having said these things, He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and applied the clay to his eyes.
And He said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which means Sent). Therefore he went and washed, and came seeing.
Therefore the neighbors and those having seen him before, that he was a beggar, were saying, “Is this not he who was sitting and begging?”
Some were saying, “It is he,” but others, were saying, “No, but he is like him.” He kept saying, “I am he.”
Therefore they were saying to him, “How then were your eyes opened?”
He answered, “The man called Jesus made clay, and anointed my eyes, and He said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ Therefore having gone and having washed, I received sight.”
And they said to him, “Where is He?” He says, “I do not know.”
They bring him who once was blind to the Pharisees.
Now the day in which Jesus had made the clay and opened his eyes was a Sabbath.
Therefore the Pharisees also were asking him again how he had received sight. And he said to them, “He put clay on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.”
Therefore some of the Pharisees were saying, “This man is not from God, for He does not keep the Sabbath.” But others were saying, “How is a sinful man able to do such signs?” And there was division among them.
Therefore they say again to the blind man, “What do you say concerning Him, for He opened your eyes?” And he said, “He is a prophet.”
Therefore the Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been blind and had received sight, until they called the parents of him having received sight.
And they asked them, saying, “Is this your son, of whom you say that he was born blind? Then how presently does he see?”
Therefore his parents answered and said, “We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind.
But how he sees presently, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He has age. He will speak concerning himself.”
His parents said these things because they were afraid of the Jews. For the Jews already had agreed together that if anyone should confess Him Christ, he would be expelled from the synagogue.
Because of this, his parents said, “He has age. Ask him.”
Therefore they called out a second time the man who had been blind, and said to him, “Give glory to God! We know that this man is a sinner.”
Then he answered, “Whether He is a sinner I do not know. One thing I do know, that being blind, now I see.”
So they said to him, “What did He do to you? How did He open your eyes?”
He answered them, “I told you already, and you did not listen. Why do you wish to hear again? Do you wish to become His disciples also?”
And they railed at him and said, “You are a disciple of that One, but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God has spoken to Moses, but we do not know from where this man is.”
The man answered and said to them, “In this indeed is an amazing thing, that you do not know from where He is, and yet He opened my eyes.
We know that God does not hear sinners, but if anyone is God-fearing and does His will, He hears him.
Never out of the age has it been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one having been born blind.
If this man were not from God, He could do nothing.”
They answered and said to him, “You were born entirely in sins, and do you teach us?” And they cast him out.
Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him, He said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
He answered and said, “And who is He, Lord, that I may believe in Him?”
Jesus said to him, “You have both seen Him, and He is the One speaking with you.”
And he was saying, “I believe, Lord.” And he worshiped Him.
And Jesus said, “For judgment I came into this world, that those not seeing may see, and those seeing may become blind.”
Some of the Pharisees who were with Him heard these things, and they said to Him, “Are we also blind?”
Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no sin. But since you say, ‘We see,’ your sin remains.”
“Truly, truly, I say to you, the one not entering in by the door to the fold of the sheep, but climbing up another way, he is a thief and a robber.
But the one entering in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
To him the doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice. And he calls the own sheep by name and leads them out.
When he has brought out all the own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
But they will never follow a stranger, but will flee from him, because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.”
Jesus spoke to them this allegory, but they did not know what it was that He was saying to them.
Therefore Jesus again said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.
All who ever came before Me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them.
I am the door. If anyone enters in by Me, he will be saved, and will go in and will go out and will find pasture.
The thief comes only that he might steal and might kill and might destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.
I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down His life for the sheep.
But the hired servant, being not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them—
because he is a hired servant and is not himself concerned about the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and I know My own, and I am known by My own.
As the Father knows Me, I also know the Father; and I lay down My life for the sheep.
And I have other sheep which are not of this fold. It behooves Me to bring those also, and they will hear My voice, and there will be one flock with one shepherd.
Because of this, the Father loves Me, because I lay down My life, that I might take it again.
No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it again. This commandment I received from My Father.”
Again there was division among the Jews on account of these words.
And many of them were saying, “He has a demon and is insane. Why do you listen to Him?”
Others were saying, “These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. Is a demon able to open the eyes of the blind?”
At the time the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem. It was winter,
and Jesus was walking in the temple in the porch of Solomon.
Therefore the Jews encircled Him and were saying to Him, “Until when do You hold our soul in suspense? If You are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
Jesus answered them, “I told you, and you do not believe. The works that I do in the name of My Father, these bear witness concerning Me.
But you do not believe, because you are not from among My sheep.
My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me.
And I give them eternal life, and never shall they perish to the age, and never will anyone seize them out of My hand.
My Father who has given them to Me is greater than all, and no one is able to seize them out of the Father’s hand.
I and the Father are one.”
Therefore the Jews took up stones again, that they might stone Him.
Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father; because of which work of these do you stone Me?”
The Jews answered Him, “We do not stone You for a good work, but for blasphemy, and because You, being a man, make yourself God.”
Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your Law: ‘I said you are gods’?
If he called them gods to whom the word of God came, and the Scripture is not able to be broken,
do you say of Him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, ‘I am Son of God’?
If I do not do the works of My Father, do not believe Me.
But if I do, even if you do not believe Me, believe the works, so that you may know and may understand that the Father is in Me, and I in the Father.”
Therefore they were seeking to seize Him again, but He went forth out of their hand.
And He departed again beyond the Jordan, to the place where John was baptizing at first. And He stayed there.
And many came to Him and were saying, “John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man was true.”
And many believed in Him there.
Now a certain man was ailing, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
And Mary was the one having anointed the Lord with fragrant oil and having wiped His feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
Therefore the sisters sent to Him, saying, “Lord, behold, he whom You love is sick.”
And having heard, Jesus said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.”
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
Therefore when He heard that he is sick, then indeed He remained two days in the place in which He was.
Then after this, He says to the disciples, “Let us go into Judea again.”
The disciples say to Him, “Rabbi, just now the Jews were seeking to stone You, and You are going there again?”
Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
He said these things, and after this He says to them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I go that I may awaken him.”
Therefore His disciples said, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will get well.”
Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that He speaks of the rest of sleep.
So then Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus has died,
and I am glad for your sake I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
Therefore Thomas called Didymus said to the fellow disciples, “Let us also go, that we may die with Him.”
Therefore having come, Jesus found him already having been four days in the tomb.
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia away,
and many of the Jews had come unto Martha and Mary, that they might console them concerning the brother.
Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus is coming, met Him; but Mary was sitting in the house.
Then Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if You had been here, my brother would not have died.
Nevertheless, even now I know that whatever You might ask God, God will give You.”
Jesus says to her, “Your brother will rise again.”
Martha says to him, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection, in the last day.”
Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life; the one believing in Me, even if he should die, he will live.
And everyone living and believing in Me shall never die, to the age. Do you believe this?”
She says to Him, “Yes, Lord; I have believed that You are the Christ, the Son of God, the One coming into the world.”
And having said these things she went away and called her sister Mary secretly, having said, “The Teacher is come, and He calls you.”
And she, when she heard, rose up quickly and was coming to Him.
Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where Martha had met Him.
Then the Jews being with her in the house and consoling her, having seen that Mary rose up quickly and went out, followed her, having supposed she is going to the tomb that she might weep there.
Therefore Mary, when she came to where Jesus was, having seen Him, fell at His feet, saying to Him, “Lord, if You had been here, my brother would not have died.”
Therefore Jesus, when He saw her weeping and the Jews having come with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit and Himself troubled.
And He said, “Where have you laid him.” They say to Him, “Lord, come and see.”
Jesus wept.
Therefore the Jews were saying, “Behold how He loved him!”
But some of them said, “Was not this man having opened the eyes of the blind able to have caused that this one also should not have died?”
So Jesus, being deeply moved in Himself again, comes to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone was lying against it.
Jesus says, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the one having died, says to Him, “Lord, he stinks already, for it is four days.”
Jesus says to her, “Did I not say to you that if you should believe, you will see the glory of God.”
So they took away the stone. Now Jesus lifted His eyes upwards and said, “Father, I thank You that You have heard Me.
And I knew that always You hear Me; but I said it on account of the crowd standing around, that they may believe that You sent Me.”
And having said these things, He cried out in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come forth.”
The one having been dead came forth, the feet and hands being bound with linen strips, and his face bound about with a soudarion. Jesus says to them, “Unbind him and allow him to go.”
Therefore many of the Jews having come to Mary, and having seen what He did, believed in Him.
But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered a council and were saying, “What are we to do? For this man does many signs.
If we shall let Him alone like this, all will believe in Him, and the Romans will come and will take away both our place and nation.”
But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest the same year, said to them, “You know nothing at all,
nor do you consider that it is profitable for you that one man should die for the people, and the whole nation should not perish.”
Now he did not say this from himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation,
and not for the nation only, but also that children of God, those having been scattered, He might gather together into one.
So from that day, they took counsel together that they might kill Him.
Therefore Jesus no longer walked publicly among the Jews, but went away from there into the region near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim. And there He stayed with the disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up to Jerusalem out of the region before the Passover, so that they might purify themselves.
Therefore they were seeking Jesus and were saying among one another standing in the temple, “What does it seem to you, that He will not come to the feast?”
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a command that if anyone should know where He is, he should show it, so that they might seize Him.
Therefore six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised out from the dead.
Therefore they made Him a supper there, and Martha was serving, and Lazarus was one of those reclining with Him.
Therefore Mary, having taken a litra of fragrant oil of pure nard, of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped His feet with her hair; and the house was filled with the fragrance of the oil.
But Judas Iscariot, one of His disciples, being about to betray Him, says,
“Why was this fragrant oil not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?”
But he said this, not because he was caring for the poor, but because he was a thief; and having the money bag, he used to pilfer that being put into it.
Therefore Jesus said, “Leave her alone, so that for the day of My burial she may keep it.
For you always have the poor with you, but not always do you have Me.”
Therefore a great crowd of the Jews knew that He is there; and they came, not only because of Jesus, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom He had raised out from the dead.
But the chief priests took counsel, that they might kill Lazarus also,
because on account of him many of the Jews were going away and were believing in Jesus.
On the next day the great crowd having come to the feast, having heard that Jesus is coming into Jerusalem,
took the branches of the palm trees and went out to meet Him, and were shouting: “Hosanna!” “Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord!” “And the King of Israel!”
Now Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat upon it, as it is written:
“Fear not, daughter of Zion. Behold, your King comes, sitting on a colt of a donkey.”
His disciples did not know these things from the first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of Him, and these things they had done to Him.
Therefore the crowd being with Him when He called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him out from the dead, continued to bear witness.
On account of this also the crowd met Him, because they heard of His having done this sign.
Therefore the Pharisees said among themselves, “You see that you gain nothing. Behold, the world has gone after Him.”
Now there were certain Greeks among those coming up that they might worship at the feast.
Therefore these came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and they were asking him, saying, “Sir, we desire to see Jesus.”
Philip comes and tells Andrew; Andrew and Philip come and tell Jesus.
And Jesus answered them, saying, “The hour has come that Son of Man should be glorified.
Truly, truly, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat, having fallen into the ground, should die, it abides alone; but if it should die, it bears much fruit.
The one loving his life loses it, and the one hating his life in this world will keep it to eternal life.
If anyone serves Me, let him follow Me; and where I am, there My servant will be also. If anyone serves Me, the Father will honor him.
Now My soul has been troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, save Me from this hour’? But on account of this I came to this hour.
Father, glorify Your name.” Therefore a voice came from heaven: “I have both glorified it, and I will glorify it again.”
Therefore the crowd having stood, and having heard, was saying, “There has been thunder.” Others were saying, “An angel has spoken to Him.”
Jesus answered and said, “This voice has not come because of Me but because of you.
Now is the judgment of this world; now the prince of this world will be cast out.
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all to Myself.”
Now He was saying this, signifying by what death He was about to die.
Then the crowd answered Him, “We have heard from the Law that Christ abides to the age, and how do you say that it behooves the Son of Man to be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?”
Therefore Jesus said to them, “Yet a little while, the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, so that darkness might not overtake you. And the one walking in the darkness does not know where he is going.
While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become sons of light.” Jesus spoke these things, and having gone away, He was hidden from them.
Although so many of His signs had been done before them, they did not believe in Him,
so that word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, that said: “Lord, who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
Because of this, they were not able to believe, for again Isaiah said:
“He has blinded their eyes, and has hardened their heart, that they should not see with the eyes, and understand with the heart, and turn, and I will heal them.”
Isaiah said these things because he saw His glory and spoke concerning Him.
Nevertheless, indeed many even of the rulers believed in Him, but on account of the Pharisees they were not confessing, so that they might not be put out of the synagogue.
For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.
And Jesus cried out and said, “The one believing in Me, does not believe in Me, but in the One having sent Me.
And the one beholding Me, beholds the One having sent Me.
I have come into the world as a light, so that everyone believing in Me should not abide in darkness.
And if anyone hears My words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come that I might judge the world, but that I might save the world.
The one rejecting Me and not receiving My words has one judging him: The word which I spoke, that will judge him in the last day.
For I did not speak from Myself, but the Father Himself, having sent Me, gave Me a commandment, what I should say and what I should speak.
And I know that His commandment is eternal life. Therefore what I speak, as the Father has said to Me, so I speak.”
Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that His hour had come that He would depart out of this world to the Father, having loved the own who were in the world, He loved them to the end.
And supper taking place, the devil already having put into the heart of Judas son of Simon Iscariot that he should betray Him,
knowing that the Father has given Him all things into the hands, and that He came forth from God and He is going to God,
He rises from the supper and lays aside the garments. And having taken a towel, He girded Himself.
After that, He pours water into the basin, and He began to wash the feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the towel with which He was girded.
Then He comes to Simon Peter, who says to Him, “Lord, do You wash my feet?”
Jesus answered and said to him, “What I do, you do not know presently, but you will know after these things.”
Peter says to Him, “Never shall You wash my feet, to the age.” Jesus answered him, “Unless I wash you, you have no part with Me.”
Simon Peter says to Him, “Lord, not my feet only, but also the hands and the head.”
Jesus says to him, “The one having been bathed has no need to wash, except the feet, but is wholly clean. And you all are clean, but not all.”
For He knew the one who was betraying Him; on account of this He said, “You are not all clean.”
Therefore when He had washed their feet and taken His garments, and having reclined again, He said to them, “Do you know what I have done to you?
You call Me Teacher and Lord, and you say rightly, for so I am.
Therefore if I, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash the feet of one another.
For I gave you a pattern, that as I did to you, you also should do.
Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his master, nor a messenger greater than the one having sent him.
If you know these things, you are blessed if you do them.
I speak not about all of you. I know whom I chose; but it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled: ‘The one eating My bread has lifted up his heel against Me.’
I am telling you from this time, before it comes to pass, so that when it comes to pass you should believe that I am He.
Truly, truly, I say to you, the one receiving whomever I shall send, receives Me; and the one receiving Me, receives the One having sent Me.”
Having said these things, Jesus was troubled in spirit, and He testified and said, “Truly, truly, I say to you that one of you will betray Me.”
The disciples began to look upon one another, being uncertain of whom He is speaking.
There was reclining one of His disciples whom Jesus loved in the bosom of Jesus.
Therefore Simon Peter motions to him, to ask who it is about whom He is speaking?
Then he thus having leaned on the breast of Jesus, says to Him, “Lord, who is it?”
Then Jesus answers, “It is he to whom I will dip the morsel and will give him.” Then having dipped the morsel, He takes it and gives it to Judas, son of Simon Iscariot.
And after the morsel, then Satan entered into him. Therefore Jesus says to him, “What you do, do quickly.”
Now none of those reclining knew why He spoke this to him.
For some were thinking, since Judas had the money bag, that Jesus is saying to him, “Buy what things we have need of for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor.
Therefore having received the morsel, he went out immediately. And it was night.
Therefore when he had gone out, Jesus says, “Now the Son of Man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in Him.
If God is glorified in Him, God also will glorify Him in Himself, and will glorify Him immediately.
Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You will seek Me, and as I said to the Jews, now I say also to you: ‘Where I go, you are not able to come.’
A new commandment I give to you, that you should love one another. As I have loved you, so you also should love one another.
By this all will know that you are My disciples, if you have love among one another.”
Simon Peter says to Him, “Lord, where are You going?” Jesus answered him, “Where I go, you are not able to follow Me now, but you will follow afterward.”
Peter says to Him, “Lord, why am I not able to follow You presently? I will lay down my life for You.”
Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for Me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the rooster will not crow until you will deny Me three times.
Let not your heart be troubled. You believe in God, believe also in Me.
In My Father’s house there are many mansions. And if not so, would I have told you that I go to prepare a place for you?
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I am coming again and will receive you to Myself, that where I am, you may be also.
And you know the way to the place I am going.”
Thomas says to Him, “Lord, we do not know where You are going; how can we know the way?”
Jesus says to him, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father, if not by Me.
If you had known Me, you would also have known My Father. From now you know Him, and have seen Him.”
Philip says to Him, “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.”
Jesus says to him, “Am I with you so long a time, and you have not known Me, Philip? The one having seen Me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
Do you not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me? The words that I speak to you, I do not speak from Myself; but the Father dwelling in Me does His works.
Believe Me that I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me; but if not, believe because of the works themselves.
Truly, truly, I say to you, the one believing in Me, the works that I do, also he will do. And he will do greater than these, because I am going to the Father.
And whatever you might ask in My name, this I will do, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If you ask Me anything in My name, I will do it.
If you love Me, you will keep My commandments.
And I will ask the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may be with you to the age—
the Spirit of truth, whom the world is not able to receive, because it does not see Him nor know. But you know Him, for He abides with you and He will be in you.
I will not leave you as orphans; I am coming to you.
Yet a little while, and the world sees Me no more, but you see Me. Because I live, you also will live.
In that day you will know that I am in My Father, and you in Me, and I in you.
The one having My commandments and keeping them, he is the one loving Me. Now the one loving Me will be loved by My Father. And I will love him, and will show Myself to him.”
Judas (not Iscariot) says to Him, “Lord, then what has occurred, that You are about to manifest Yourself to us, and not to the world?”
Jesus answered and said to him, “If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word, and My Father will love him, and we will come to him and will make a home with him.
The one not loving Me does not keep My words. And the word that you hear is not Mine, but that of the Father having sent Me.
These things I have said to you while abiding with you.
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things and will bring to your remembrance all things that I have said to you.
Peace I leave with you; My peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it fear.
You heard that I said to you, ‘I am going away and I am coming to you.’ If you loved Me, you would have rejoiced that I am going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I.
And now I have told you before it comes to pass, that when it shall have come to pass, you might believe.
No longer will I speak much with you; for the ruler of this world comes, and in Me he has nothing.
But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father has commanded Me, thus I do. Rise up, let us go from here.
I am the true vine and My Father is the vinedresser.
Every branch not bearing fruit in Me, He takes it away; and every one bearing fruit, He prunes it that it may bear more fruit.
Already you are clean by reason of the word that I have spoken to you.
Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch is not able to bear fruit of itself unless it abides in the vine, so neither you, unless you abide in Me.
I am the vine; you are the branches. The one abiding in Me and I in him, he bears much fruit. For apart from Me you are able to do nothing.
If anyone does not abide in Me, he is thrown out like the branch and is dried up, and they gather them and cast them into the fire, and it is burned.
If you abide in Me and My words abide in you, you shall ask whatever you wish, and to you it will come to pass.
In this My Father is glorified, that you should bear much fruit, and you shall be My disciples.
As the Father has loved Me, I also have loved you. Abide in My Love.
If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My love, as I have kept My Father’s commandments and abide in His love.
These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may be in you and your joy may be full.
This is My commandment, that you love one another as I loved you.
Greater love has no one than this, that one should lay down his life for his friends.
You are My friends, if you do what I command you.
No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know what his master is doing. But I have called you friends, because all things that I heard from My Father, I have made known to you.
You did not chose Me, but I chose you and appointed you, that you should go and you should bear fruit, and your fruit should remain, so that whatever you might ask the Father in My name, He may give you.
These things I command you, that you love one another.
If the world hates you, you know that it has hated Me before you.
If you were of the world, the world would love you as its own; but because you are not of the world but I chose you out of the world, on account of this, the world hates you.
Remember the word that I said to you: ‘A servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they kept My word, they will keep yours also.
But they will do all these things against you on account of My name, because they have not known the One having sent Me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.
The one hating Me hates My Father also.
If I had not done among them the works that no other has done, they would not have had sin; but now they have both seen and hated both Me and My Father.
But this is that the word having been written in their Law may be fulfilled: ‘They hated Me without cause.’
When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth from the Father, He will bear witness concerning Me.
And you also bear witness, because you are with Me from the beginning.
I have spoken these things to you that you might not fall away.
They will put you out of the synagogues; but an hour is coming that everyone having killed you will think it is to offer a service to God.
And they will do these things because they do not know the Father nor Me.
But I have said these things to you, so that when their hour might have come, you may remember that I said them to you. Now I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I go to the One having sent Me, and none of you asks Me, ‘Where are You going?’
But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart.
But I tell you the truth, it is profitable for you that I should go away; for unless I go away the Helper will not come to you; but if I go, I will send Him to you.
And having come, He will convict the world concerning sin, and concerning righteousness, and concerning judgment:
concerning sin indeed, because they do not believe in Me;
and concerning righteousness, because I go away to the Father and you behold Me no more;
and concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
Yet I have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.
But when He the, Spirit of truth, shall come, He will guide you into all the truth. For He will not speak from Himself, but whatever He may hear, He will speak. And He will declare to you the things coming.
He will glorify Me, for He will take from that which is Mine and will disclose it to you.
All things that the Father has are Mine. Because of this, I said that He will take from that which is Mine and will disclose it to you.
A little while and you behold Me no longer; and again a little while and you will see Me.”
Therefore some of his disciples said to one another, “What is this that He says to us, ‘A little while and you do not behold Me; and again a little while and you will see Me’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?”
Therefore they were saying, “What is this that He says, ‘a little while’? We do not know what He is saying.”
Jesus knew that they were desiring to ask Him, and He said to them, “Do you inquire among one another concerning this, that I said, ‘A little while and you do not behold Me, and again a little while and you will see Me’?
Truly, truly, I say to you, that you will weep and will lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be grieved, but your grief will turn to joy.
The woman has pain when she is giving birth, because her hour has come; but when she brings forth the child, she remembers the tribulation no longer, on account of the joy that a man has been born into the world.
Therefore you also indeed have grief now; but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you.
And in that day, you will ask of Me nothing. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you may ask the Father in My name, He will give you.
Until now you have asked nothing in My name. Ask and you will receive, that your joy may be full.
I have spoken these things to you in allegories; an hour is coming when I will speak to you no more in allegories, but I will report to you plainly concerning the Father.
In that day you will ask in My name, and I do not say to you that I will implore the Father for you.
For the Father Himself loves you, because you have loved Me and have believed that I came forth from God.
I came forth from the Father and have come into the world; again I leave the world and go to the Father.”
His disciples say, “Behold, now You speak in openness, and You do not speak allegory.
Now we know that You know all things, and have no need that anyone should ask You. In this we believe that You came forth from God.”
Jesus answered them, “Now do you believe?
Behold, an hour is coming and has come, when you will be scattered, each to the own, and I, you shall leave alone; yet I am not alone, for the Father is with Me.
I have spoken these things to you so that in Me you may have peace. In the world you have tribulation. But take courage; I have overcome the world.”
Jesus spoke these things, and having lifted up His eyes to heaven, He said, “Father, the hour has come; glorify Your Son, that the Son may glorify You.
As You gave Him authority over all flesh, so that all whom You have given Him, He may give to them eternal life.
Now this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom You have sent.
I glorified You on the earth, having completed the work that You have given Me that I should do.
And now glorify Me, You Father, with Yourself, with the glory that I had with You before the world existed.
I revealed Your name to the men whom You have given Me out of the world. They were Yours, and to Me You gave them, and they have kept Your word.
Now they have known that all things You have given Me are of You.
For the words that You have given Me I have given them, and they received them, and knew truly that I came forth from You; and they believed that You sent Me.
I am praying concerning them. I do not pray concerning the world, but concerning those whom You have given Me, for they are Yours.
And all things of mine are Yours, and Yours Mine. And I have been glorified in them.
And I am no longer in the world, and yet they are themselves in the world, and I am coming to You. Holy Father, keep them in Your name, which You have given Me, that they may be one as we are.
When I was with them, I was keeping them in Your name, which You have given Me. And I guarded them, and none of them has perished, except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I am coming to You, and I speak these things in the world, so that they may have My joy fulfilled within them.
I have given them Your word, and the world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
I do not ask that You should take them out of the world, but that You should keep them from evil.
They are not of the world, as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them by the truth; Your word is truth.
As You sent Me into the world, I also sent them into the world;
and for them I sanctify Myself, that they also may be sanctified in truth.
But I do not ask for these only, but also for those believing in Me through their word,
that all may be one, as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You, that they also may be in Us, that the world may believe that You sent Me.
And I have given them the glory which You have given Me, so that they may be one, as We are one—
I in them, and You in Me—that they may be perfected in unity, so that the world may know that You sent Me and loved them even as You loved Me.
Father, those whom You have given Me, I desire that they also may be with Me where I am, that they may behold My glory that You gave Me because You loved Me before the foundation of the world.
Righteous Father, although the world has not known You, yet I have known You, and these have known that You sent Me.
And I made known to them Your name, and will make it known, so that the love with which You loved Me may be in them, and I in them.”
Having said these things, Jesus went out with His disciples beyond the winter stream of Kidron, where there was a garden, into which He and His disciples entered.
Now Judas, who was delivering Him up, also knew the place, because Jesus often gathered together there with His disciples.
Therefore Judas, having procured the cohort and officers from the chief priests and from the Pharisees, comes there with lanterns and torches and weapons.
Therefore Jesus, knowing all things that are coming upon Him, having gone forth, also said to them, “Whom do you seek?”
They answered Him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” He says to them, “I am He.” Now Judas, who is delivering Him up, also had been standing with them.
Therefore when He said to them, “I am He,” they drew toward the back and fell to the ground.
Therefore He questioned them again, “Whom do you seek?” And they said, “Jesus of Nazareth.”
Jesus answered, “I have told you that I am He. Therefore if you seek Me, allow these to go away,”
so that the word that He had spoken might be fulfilled, “Those whom You have given Me, I have lost none of them, not one.”
Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear. Now the servant’s name was Malchus.
Therefore Jesus said to Peter, “Put the sword into the sheath. The cup which the Father has given Me, shall I not drink it?”
Then the cohort and the commander and the officers of the Jews took hold of Jesus and bound Him.
And they led Him away to Annas first; for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest the same year.
Now Caiaphas was the one having given counsel to the Jews that it is profitable for one man to perish for the people.
And Simon Peter and the other disciple were following Jesus. Now since that disciple was known to the high priest, he also entered with Jesus into the court of the high priest.
But Peter stood at the door outside. Therefore the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought in Peter.
Therefore the servant girl, the doorkeeper, says to Peter, “Are you not also of the disciples of this man?” He says, “I am not.”
Now the servants and the officers were standing, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold and they were warming themselves. And Peter was also standing with them and warming himself.
Then the high priest questioned Jesus concerning His disciples and concerning His teaching.
Jesus answered him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, where the Jews always come together; and I spoke nothing in secret.
Why do you question Me? Question those having heard what I spoke to them. Behold, they know what I said.”
Now of His having said these things, one of the officers standing by gave a blow with the palm to Jesus, having said, “Do You answer the high priest this way?”
Jesus answered him, “If I spoke evil, bear witness concerning the evil; but if rightly, why do you strike Me?”
Then Annas sent Him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Therefore they said to him, “Are you not also one of His disciples?” He denied it and said, “I am not.”
One of the servants of the high priest, being kinsman of him whose ear Peter had cut off, says, “Did I not see you in the garden with Him?”
Then Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.
Then they are leading Jesus from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. Now it was early, and they did not enter into the Praetorium, so that they should not be defiled, but might eat the Passover.
Therefore Pilate went out to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?”
They answered and said to him, “If He were not doing evil, we would not have delivered Him to you.”
Therefore Pilate said to them, “Take Him yourselves and judge Him according to your Law.” The Jews said to him, “It is not permitted to us to put anyone to death”—
that word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which He had spoken signifying what death He was about to die.
Therefore Pilate entered again into the Praetorium, and he called Jesus and said to Him, “Are You the King of the Jews?”
Jesus answered, “Do you say this of yourself, or did others say it to you concerning Me?”
Pilate answered, “Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests delivered You to me. What have You done?”
Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world; if My kingdom were of this world, My attendants would fight that I might not be betrayed to the Jews. But now My kingdom is not from here.”
Therefore Pilate said to Him, “Then You are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I may bear witness to the truth. Everyone being of the truth hears My voice.”
Pilate says to Him, “What is truth?” And having said this, he went out again to the Jews and says to them, “I find no guilt in Him.
But it is your custom that I should release to you one at the Passover; therefore do you wish I should release to you the King of the Jews?”
Then they cried out again saying, “Not this one, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a robber.
So at that time Pilate took Jesus and scourged Him.
And the soldiers, having twisted together a crown of thorns, put it on His head and cast around Him a purple robe.
And they began coming up to Him and saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” And they kept giving Him blows with the palm.
And Pilate went forth outside again and says to them, “Behold, I bring Him out to you so that you may know that I find no guilt in Him.”
Therefore Jesus went forth outside, wearing the thorny crown and the purple robe. And he says to them, “Behold the man!”
Therefore when the chief priests and the officers saw Him, they cried out saying, “Crucify! Crucify!” Pilate says to them, “Take Him yourselves and crucify Him, for I find no guilt in Him.”
The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and according to the law He ought to die, because He made Himself the Son of God.”
Therefore when Pilate heard this word, he was even more afraid.
And he went into the Praetorium again, and he says to Jesus, “Where are You from?” But Jesus did not give him an answer.
Therefore Pilate says to Him, “Do You not speak to me? Do You not know that I have authority to release You, and I have authority to crucify You?”
Jesus answered him, “You would have no authority over Me, if it were not given to you from above. Because of this, the one having delivered Me up to you has greater sin.”
Out of this, Pilate was seeking to release Him; but the Jews cried out, saying, “If you release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar. Everyone making himself a king speaks against Caesar.”
Therefore Pilate, having heard these words, brought Jesus out and sat down upon the judgment seat at a place called The Stone Pavement, and in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
Now it was the Day of Preparation of the Passover; it was about the sixth hour. And he says to the Jews, “Behold your king!”
So they cried out, “Away with Him, away! Crucify Him!” Pilate says to them, “Shall I crucify your King?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king except Caesar.”
So then, he delivered Him to them, that He might be crucified. Therefore they took Jesus.
And bearing His own cross, He went out to the place called the Place of the Skull, which in Hebrew is called Golgotha,
where they crucified Him, and with Him two others, on this side and on that side, and Jesus in between.
And Pilate also wrote a title and put it on the cross. And it was written, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.
Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
Therefore the chief priests of the Jews were saying to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that He said, ‘I am King of the Jews.’”
Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”
Then the soldiers, when they crucified Jesus, took His garments and made four parts, to each soldier a part, and also the tunic. Now the tunic was seamless, woven from the top all throughout.
Therefore they said to one another, “Let us not tear it up, but let us cast lots for it, whose it will be,” that Scripture might be fulfilled that said: “They divided My garments among them, and for My clothing they cast a lot.” So indeed the soldiers did these things.
Now His mother, and the sister of His mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene, had been standing by the cross of Jesus.
Therefore Jesus, having seen His mother and the disciple whom He loved standing by, says to His mother, “Woman, behold, your son.”
Then He says to the disciple, “Behold, your mother.” And from that hour the disciple took her to the own.
After this, Jesus, knowing that now all things had been accomplished, so that Scripture might be fulfilled, says, “I thirst.”
A vessel full of sour wine had been set there. So having put on a stalk of hyssop a sponge filled with sour wine, they brought it to the mouth.
Therefore when Jesus took the sour wine, He said “It has been finished.” And having bowed the head, He yielded up the spirit.
Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation, so that bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath—for that Sabbath was a high day—asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and they might be taken away.
So the soldiers came, and indeed they broke the legs of the first, and of the other having been crucified with Him.
But having come to Jesus, when they saw Him already having been dead, they did not break His legs.
But one of the soldiers pierced His side with a spear, and blood and water came out immediately.
And the one having seen has borne witness, and his testimony is true. And He knows that he is speaking truth, so that you also might believe.
For these things took place so that the Scripture might be fulfilled: “Not one bone of Him will be broken.”
And again, another Scripture says: “They will look on the One they have pierced.”
And after these things, Joseph from Arimathea, being a disciple of Jesus, but concealed through the fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate gave permission. So he came and took away His body.
Now Nicodemus, the one having come to Him by night at the first, also came bearing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred litras.
So they took the body of Jesus and bound it in linen cloths, with the spices, as is the custom among the Jews to prepare for burial.
Now there was a garden in the place where He was crucified, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had yet been laid.
So on account of the Preparation of the Jews, because the tomb was near, they laid Jesus there.
Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene comes to the tomb early, it being still dark, and she sees the stone having been removed from the tomb.
So she runs and comes to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and she says to them, “They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid Him.”
Therefore Peter and the other disciple went forth and were coming to the tomb.
Now the two were running together, and the other disciple ran ahead faster than Peter and came to the tomb first.
And having stooped down, he sees the linen cloths lying there; but he did not enter.
Then Simon Peter also comes, following him, and he entered into the tomb and sees the linen cloths lying there,
and the soudarion that was upon His head, not lying with the linen cloths, but having been folded up in a place by itself.
So then the other disciple, the one having come to the tomb first, also entered; and he saw and believed.
For not yet did they understand the Scripture that it behooves Him to rise out from the dead.
Therefore the disciples went away again to their homes.
But Mary stood outside at the tomb weeping. Then as she was weeping, she stooped down into the tomb,
and she sees two angels in white sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
And they say to her, “Woman, why do you weep?” She says to them, “Because they have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have laid Him.”
Having said these things, she turned back around, and she sees Jesus standing there, and she had not known that it is Jesus.
Jesus says to her, “Woman, why do you weep? Whom do you seek?” Thinking that it is the gardener, she says to Him, “Sir, if you have carried Him off, tell me where you have laid Him, and I will take Him away.”
Jesus says to her, “Mary.” Having turned around, she says to Him in Hebrew, “Rabboni,” that is to say, “Teacher.”
Jesus says to her, “Do not touch Me, for not yet have I ascended to the Father. Now go to My brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to My Father and your Father, and to My God and your God.’”
Mary Magdalene comes bringing word to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord,” and that He had said these things to her.
Therefore it being evening the same day, the first of the week, and the doors where the disciples were having been shut through the fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and He says to them, “Peace to you.”
And having said this, He showed them both His hands and His side. Then the disciples rejoiced, having seen the Lord.
Therefore Jesus said to them again, “Peace to you. As the Father has sent Me forth, I also send you.”
And having said this, He breathed on them and He says to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
If you might forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you might retain any, they are retained.”
But Thomas, one of the Twelve, the one called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples were saying to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see in His hands the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the mark of the nails, and put my hands into His side, I will never believe.”
And after eight days His disciples were again inside, and Thomas with them, the doors having been shut. Jesus comes, and He stood in the midst and said, “Peace to you.”
Then He says to Thomas, “Bring your finger here, and see My hands; and bring your hand, and put it into My side; and be not unbelieving, but believing.”
Thomas answered and said to Him, “My Lord and my God!”
Jesus says to him, “Because you have seen Me, you have believed; blessed are those not having seen, yet having believed.”
So indeed Jesus also did many other signs in the presence of His disciples, which are not written in this book.
But these have been written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, you may have life in His name.
After these things, Jesus revealed Himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. Now He revealed Himself in this way:
Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael from Cana of Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of His disciples were together.
Simon Peter says to them, “I am going to fish.” They say to him, “We also are coming with you.” They went forth and went up into the boat, and during that night they caught nothing.
Now morning already having come, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not know that it is Jesus.
Therefore Jesus says to them, “Children do you have any food?” They answered Him, “No.”
And He said to them, “Cast the net to the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they cast, and they were not able to haul it in from the multitude of the fish.
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved says to Peter, “It is the Lord.” So Simon Peter, having heard that it is the Lord, put on the outer garment, (for he was naked), and he cast himself into the sea.
Now the other disciples came in the boat, dragging the net with the fish, for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits away.
So when they got out onto the land, they see a fire of coals lying, and a fish lying on it, and bread.
Jesus says to them, “Bring some of the fish that you have now caught.”
Therefore Simon Peter went up and drew the net to the land, full of large fish, a hundred fifty-three. Although there are so many, the net was not torn.
Jesus says to them, “Come, have breakfast.” But none of the disciples dared to ask Him, “Who are You?” knowing that it is the Lord.
Jesus comes and takes the bread and gives it to them, and the fish likewise.
This is now the third time Jesus was revealed the disciples, having been raised out from the dead.
Therefore when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love Me more than these?” He says to Him, “Yes, Lord; You know that I dearly love You.” He says to him, “Feed My lambs.”
He says to him again a second time, “Simon son of John, do you love Me?” He says to Him, “Yes, Lord; You know that I dearly love You.” He says to him, “Shepherd My sheep.”
He says to him the third time, “Simon son of John, do you dearly love Me?” Peter was grieved because He said to him the third time, “Do you dearly love Me?” And he said to Him, “Lord, You know all things; You know that I dearly love You.” Jesus says to him, “Feed My sheep.
Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were younger, you dressed yourself and walked where you desired; but when you shall be old, you will stretch forth your hands, and another will dress you and will bring you where you do not desire.”
Now He said this signifying by what death he will glorify God. And having said this, He says to him, “Follow Me.”
Having turned, Peter sees the disciple whom Jesus loved following, the one who also had reclined on His bosom at the supper and said, “Lord, who is it who is betraying You?”
Therefore having seen him, Peter says to Jesus, “Lord, and what about this man?”
Jesus says to him, “If I desire him to remain until I come, what is it to you? You follow Me!”
Therefore this saying went out among the brothers, that this disciple does not die. But Jesus had not said to him that he does not die, but, “If I desire him to remain until I come, what is it to you?”
This is the disciple bearing witness concerning these things, and the one having written these things. And we know that his testimony is true.
Now there are also many other things that Jesus did, which if every one should be written, I suppose not even the world itself to have space for the books to be written.
In the first account I composed, O Theophilus, concerning all the things that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
until the day He was taken up, having given orders by the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom He had chosen,
to whom He also presented Himself alive after His suffering with many proofs, being seen by them during forty days and speaking the things concerning the kingdom of God.
And being assembled together, He instructed them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father: “That which you heard of Me;
for John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days after these.”
So indeed those having come together were asking Him, saying, “Lord, at this time are you restoring the kingdom to Israel?”
And He said to them, “It is not yours to know times or seasons that the Father put in place by His own authority.
But you will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and you will be witnesses for Me, both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost part of the earth.”
And having said these things, they beholding, He was lifted up, and a cloud hid Him from their eyes.
And as they were looking intently into heaven as He was going, then behold, two men in white apparel stood by them,
who also said, “Men, Galileans, why do you stand looking into heaven? This Jesus, having been taken up from you into heaven, will thus come in that manner you beheld Him going into heaven.”
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, holding a Sabbath day’s journey.
And when they had entered, they went up into the upper room, where they were staying, both Peter and John, and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.
All these were steadfastly continuing with one accord in prayer, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with His brothers.
And in these days, Peter having stood up in the midst of the brothers, and the number of names was about a hundred twenty together, the same said,
“Men, brothers, it was necessary for the Scripture to have been fulfilled which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand by the mouth of David concerning Judas, the one having become guide to those having arrested Jesus.
For he was numbered with us, and was allotted a share of this ministry.”
(Then indeed this man acquired a field out of the reward of unrighteousness, and having fallen headlong, he burst open in the middle and all his intestines gushed out.
And it became known to all those dwelling in Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their own language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
“For it has been written in the book of Psalms: ‘Let his homestead become desolate, and let there be not one dwelling in it,’ and, ‘Let another take his position.’
Therefore it behooves the men having accompanied us during all the time that the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us,
having begun from the baptism of John until the day in which He was taken up from us, one of these, to become a witness with us of His resurrection.”
And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was called Justus, and Matthias.
And having prayed, they said, “You Lord, knower of the hearts of all, show which one of these two You have chosen
to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas turned aside to go to the own place.”
And they gave lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
And during the arriving of the day of Pentecost, they were all together in one place.
And suddenly a sound like a violent rushing wind came out of heaven, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
And there appeared to them dividing tongues as of fire and sat upon each one of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit was giving to them to utter forth.
Now there were Jews dwelling in Jerusalem, devout men from every nation under heaven.
Now of this sound having come about, the multitude came together and was confounded, because each one was hearing them speaking the own language.
And they were amazed and were marveling, saying, “Behold, are not all these who are speaking Galileans?
And how do we each hear our own language in which we were born?
Parthians and Medes and Elamites; and those inhabiting Mesopotamia, also Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
both Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya around Cyrene; and those visiting from Rome,
both Jews and converts; Cretans and Arabs—we hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God!”
And all were amazed, and were perplexed, saying to one another, “What wishes this to be?”
But others mocking were saying, “They are full of new wine.”
But Peter, having stood up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them: “Men of Judea and all those inhabiting Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give heed to my words.
For these are not drunkards as you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
But this is that having been spoken by the prophet Joel:
‘And it will be in the last days, God says, I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy, and your young men will see visions, and your elders will dream dreams.
And even upon My servants, and upon My handmaidens, I will pour out of My Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
And I will show wonders in the heaven above, and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and vapor of smoke.
The sun will be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord coming.
And it shall be that everyone who shall call upon the name of the Lord will be saved.’
Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man having been set forth by God to you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by Him in your the midst, as you yourselves know,
Him delivered up by the determinate plan and foreknowledge of God, you put to death, having crucified Him by lawless hands,
whom God raised up, having loosed the agony of death, inasmuch as it was not possible for Him to be held by it.
For David says about Him: ‘I foresaw the Lord before me continually; because He is at my right hand, I should not be shaken.
Because of this my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced, and now also my flesh will dwell in hope,
for You will not abandon my soul into Hades, nor will You allow Your Holy One to see decay.
You have made known to me the paths of life, You will fill me with joy in Your presence.’
Men, brothers, it is permitted me to speak with freedom to you concerning the patriarch David, that both he died and was buried, and his tomb is among us unto this day,
being therefore a prophet and knowing that God swore to him with an oath to set out of the fruit of his loins upon his throne.
Having foreseen, he spoke concerning the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was He abandoned into Hades, nor did His flesh see decay.
This Jesus God has raised up, to which we all are witnesses.
Therefore having been exalted at the right hand of God, and having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, He has poured out this which you are both seeing and hearing.
For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at My right hand,
until I place Your enemies as a footstool of Your feet.’
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made Him both Lord and Christ—this Jesus whom you crucified.”
And having heard, they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, “Men, brothers, what shall we do?”
And Peter says to them, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For the promise is to you and to your children and to all those at a distance, as many as the Lord our God shall call to Himself.”
And he earnestly testified many other words and was exhorting them, saying, “Be saved from this perverse generation.”
Therefore those indeed having received his word were baptized, and on that day about three thousand souls were added.
Now they were steadfastly continuing in the teaching of the apostles, and in the fellowship, in the breaking of the bread, and in the prayers.
And awe was coming upon every soul, and both many wonders and signs were taking place through the apostles.
And all those having believed were together the same, and having all things in common.
And they were selling the possessions and the goods, and were dividing them to all, as anyone had need.
And every day they were steadfastly continuing with one accord in the temple and breaking bread at each house. They were partaking of food with gladness and sincerity of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord kept adding every day to their number those who were being saved.
Now Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth.
And a certain man was being carried, being lame from his mother’s womb, whom they placed every day at the temple gate called Beautiful to ask for alms from those going into the temple,
who having seen Peter and John being about to enter into the temple, was asking to receive alms.
Now Peter having looked intently upon him, with John, said, “Look unto us.”
And he began to give heed to them, expecting to receive something from them.
But Peter said, “Silver and gold, to me there is none; but what I have, this I give to you: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk!”
And having taken him by the right hand, he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankles were strengthened.
And leaping up, he stood and began walking, and he entered into the temple with them, walking and leaping and praising God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God,
and they recognized him, that he was the one sitting for alms at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. And they were filled with wonder and amazement at that having happened to him.
Now as he is clinging to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch called Solomon’s, greatly amazed.
But having seen it, Peter answered to the people: “Men of Israel, why do you wonder at this? Or why do you look intently on us as if by our own power or godliness we have made him to walk?
The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified His servant Jesus, whom indeed you betrayed and disowned in the presence of Pilate, that one having adjudged to release Him.
But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and requested a murderer to be granted to you.
And you killed the Author of life, whom God has raised up out from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.
And on the faith in His name, this man whom you see and know, His name has strengthened; and the faith which is through Him has given to him this complete soundness before all of you.
And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did your rulers also.
But what God foretold by the mouth of all the prophets, that His Christ should suffer, He has thus fulfilled.
Repent, therefore, and turn again, for the blotting out of your sins,
so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that He may send the One having been appointed to you, Christ Jesus,
whom indeed it behooves heaven to receive until the times of restoration of all things, of which God spoke by the mouth of His holy prophets from the age.
For Moses said, ‘The Lord your God will raise up to you a prophet like me out from your brothers. You will listen to Him in all things, as many as He might say to you.
And it will be that every soul who might not heed that prophet will be utterly destroyed out from the people.’
And also all the prophets from Samuel, and those subsequently, as many as have spoken, also have proclaimed these days.
You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
God, having raised up His servant, sent Him first to you, blessing you in turning away each of you from your wickednesses.”
And of them speaking to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,
being distressed because of their teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection out from the dead.
And they laid hands on them and put them in custody until the next day; for it was already evening.
But many of those having heard the word believed, and the number of the men became about five thousand.
And it came to pass on the next day, their rulers and elders and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem,
and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of high-priestly descent.
And having placed them in the midst, they began to inquire, “In what power or in what name have you done this?”
Then Peter, having been filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “Rulers of the people and elders,
if we are being examined this day as to a good work to the ailing man, by what means he has been healed,
let it be known to all of you, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth—whom you crucified, whom God raised out from the dead—in Him this man stands before you sound.
This is ‘the stone having been rejected by you, the builders, which has become the head of the corner.’
And there is salvation in no other, for there is not another name under heaven having been given among men, by which it behooves us to be saved.”
Now seeing the boldness of Peter and of John, and having understood that they are unschooled and ordinary men, they were astonished. And they recognized them, that they had been with Jesus.
And beholding the man having been healed standing with them, they had nothing to contradict.
But having commanded them to go outside the Council, they began to confer with one another,
saying, “What shall we do to these men? For truly that a noteworthy sign has come to pass through them is evident to all those inhabiting Jerusalem, and we are not able to deny it.
But that it might not spread further on among the people, let us warn them to speak no longer to any man in this name.”
And having called them, they commanded them not to speak nor to teach at all in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answering, said to them, “Whether it is right before God to listen to you, rather than God, you must judge.
For we are not able to stop speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
And having further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way they might punish them, on account of the people, because all were glorifying God for that having happened.
For the man on whom this sign of healing had taken place was more than forty years old.
Now having been let go, they came to the own and reported how much the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
And having heard, they lifted up their voice with one accord to God and said, “Sovereign Lord, You made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them,
having spoken by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of Your servant, our father David: ‘Why did the Gentiles rage, and the peoples devise vain things?
The kings of the earth took their stand, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against His Christ.’
For in truth, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, were gathered together in this city against Your holy servant Jesus whom You anointed,
to do whatever Your hand and Your purpose had determined beforehand to happen.
And now, Lord, look upon their threats, and grant to Your servants to speak Your word with all boldness,
in that You stretch out Your hand for healing and signs and wonders to take place through the name of Your holy servant Jesus.”
And they having prayed, the place in which they were assembled was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.
Now the multitude of those having believed were one in heart and soul, and not one claimed anything of that which he possesses to be his own, but all things were theirs in common.
And with great power, the apostles were giving testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and abundant grace was upon them all.
For there was not even anyone in need among them, for as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling them, were bringing the proceeds of what is sold,
and were laying them at the feet of the apostles, and distribution was made to each as anyone had need.
Now Joseph having been called Barnabas by the apostles (which is translated, Son of encouragement), a Levite, a Cypriot at the birth,
having sold a field he owns, brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles.
Now a certain man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a property,
and he kept back from the proceeds, also the wife being aware of it, and having brought a certain portion, he laid it at the feet of the apostles.
But Peter said, “Ananias, because of why has Satan filled your heart for you to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back from the proceeds of the land?
Remaining, did not it remain yours? And having been sold, was it not in the own authority? Why did you purpose this deed in your heart? You have not lied to men, but to God!”
And hearing these words, Ananias, having fallen down, breathed his last. And great fear came upon all those hearing.
And the younger men having arisen, covered him, and having carried him out, buried him.
Now it came to pass about three hours afterward, his wife also came in, not knowing that having come to pass.
And Peter replied to her, “Tell me if you sold the land for so much?” And she said, “Yes, for so much.”
But Peter said to her, “Why is it that you have agreed together to test the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those having buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.”
And immediately she fell down at his feet and breathed her last. And the young men having come in, found her dead; and having carried her out, they buried her by her husband.
And great fear came upon the whole church and upon all those hearing these things.
Now many signs and wonders were happening among the people by the hands of the apostles. And they were all with one accord in Solomon’s Colonnade.
Now none of the rest dared to join them, but the people were magnifying them.
And more believing in the Lord were added, multitudes both of men and women,
so as even to bring out the sick into the streets, and to put them on cots and mats, that of Peter coming, at least the shadow might envelop some of them.
Now the multitude from the cities surrounding Jerusalem also were coming together, bringing the sick and those being tormented by unclean spirits, who were all healed.
But the high priest, having risen up, and all those with him (being the sect of the Sadducees) were filled with jealousy,
and they laid hands on the apostles and put them in the public jail.
But during the night an angel of the Lord, having opened the doors of the jail, having brought them out, also said,
“Go, and having stood in the temple, speak to the people all the words of this life.”
And having heard, they entered into the temple at the dawn and were teaching. Now the high priest having come, and those with him, called together the Council, even the whole Senate of the sons of Israel, and sent to the prison house to bring them.
But the officers, having come, did not find them in the prison. And having returned, they reported back,
saying, “We found the prison house shut, with all security, and the guards standing before the doors; but having opened them, we found no one inside.”
Now when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were perplexed concerning them, what this might be.
And a certain one having come, reported to them, “Behold, the men whom you put in the prison are standing in the temple and teaching the people!”
Then the captain, having gone with the officers, was bringing them, not with force, for they were afraid of the people lest they might be stoned.
And having brought them, they set them in the Council. And the high priest asked them,
saying, “By a charge we commanded you not to teach in this name, and behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you intend to bring upon us the blood of this man.”
But Peter and the apostles answering said, “It is necessary to obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, having hanged Him on a tree.
God exalted Him to His right hand as Prince and Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
And we are witnesses of these things, and also the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those obeying Him.”
And having heard, they were cut to the heart and were desiring to put them to death.
But a certain man having risen up in the Council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law honored by all the people, commanded them to put the men outside for a short while.
And he said to them, “Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what you are about to do with these men.
For before these days, Theudas rose up, affirming himself to be somebody—to whom a number of men, about four hundred, were joined—who was put to death, and all, as many as were persuaded by him, were dispersed; and it came to nothing.
After this man, Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the registration and drew away people after him. And he perished, and all, as many as were persuaded by him, were scattered.
And now I say to you, withdraw from these men and let them alone, for if this plan or this work is from men, it will be overthrown.
But if it is from God, you will not be able to overthrow it, lest ever also you would be found fighting against God.”
And they were persuaded by him. And having called in the apostles, having beaten them, they commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and they released them.
Therefore indeed they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they had been counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the Name.
And every day, in the temple and in every house, they did not cease teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Christ.
Now in these days when the disciples are multiplying, there arose a grumbling of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
So the Twelve, having called near the multitude of the disciples, said, “It is not desirable for us, having neglected the word of God, to attend tables.
Therefore brothers, select out from yourselves seven men being well attested, full of the Spirit and wisdom, whom we will appoint over this task.
And we will steadfastly continue in prayer and the ministry of the word.”
And the statement was pleasing before the whole multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas of Antioch, a convert,
whom they set before the apostles. And having prayed, they laid the hands on them.
And the word of God continued to increase, and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem was multiplied exceedingly, and a great multitude of the priests were becoming obedient to the faith.
Now Stephen, full grace and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
But certain of those from the synagogue called Freedmen, including Cyrenians and Alexandrians and of those from Cilicia and Asia, arose, disputing with Stephen.
And they were not able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by whom he was speaking.
Then they suborned men, saying, “We have heard him speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God.”
And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes; and having come upon him, they seized him and brought him to the Council.
And they set false witnesses, saying, “This man does not stop speaking words against this holy place and the Law.
For we have heard him saying that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and will change the customs that Moses delivered to us.”
And having looked intently on him, all sitting in the Council saw his face as the face of an angel.
And the high priest said, “Are these things so?”
And he began to speak: “Men, brothers, and fathers, listen! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, being in Mesopotamia, before his dwelling in Haran,
and said to him, ‘Go out from your country and from your kindred, and come into the land that I will show you.’
Then having gone out from the land of the Chaldeans, he dwelt in Haran. And from there, after his father died, He removed him into this land in which you now dwell.
And He did not give to him an inheritance in it, not even the length of a foot; but He promised to give it to him for a possession, and his to descendants after him, there being to him no child.
But God spoke thus, that his seed will be a sojourner in a strange land, and they will enslave it, and will mistreat it four hundred years.
‘And the nation to which they will be in bondage, I will judge,’ God said, ‘and after these things they will come forth and will serve Me in this place.’
And He gave to him the covenant of circumcision; and thus he begat Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
And the patriarchs, having envied Joseph, sold him into Egypt. But God was with him
and rescued him out of all his tribulations, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he appointed him ruler over Egypt and over all his house.
And there came a famine upon all of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, and our fathers were not finding sustenance.
Now Jacob, having heard there is grain in Egypt, sent forth our fathers first.
And on the second time, Joseph was made known to his brothers, and the family of Joseph became known to Pharaoh.
And Joseph, having sent, called for his father Jacob and all the kindred, seventy-five souls in all.
And Jacob went down into Egypt and died, he and our fathers,
and they were carried over into Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
Now as the time of the promise that God had sworn to Abraham was drawing near, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt,
until there arose another king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph.
Having dealt treacherously with our race, he mistreated our fathers, making them abandon their infants so that they would not live.
In that time Moses was born, and he was beautiful to God, who was brought up three months in his father’s house.
And he having been set outside, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up, and she brought him up as her own son.
And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words and deeds.
Now when his period of forty years was fulfilled, it came into his mind to visit his brothers, the sons of Israel.
And having seen a certain one being wronged, he defended him and did vengeance for the one being oppressed, having struck down the Egyptian.
And he was supposing his brothers to understand that God is giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not understand.
And on the following day, he appeared to those who were quarreling and urged them to peace, having said, ‘Men, you are brothers. Why do you wrong one another?’
But the one mistreating the neighbor pushed him away, having said, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge over us?
Do you desire to kill me, the same way you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’
Now at this remark, Moses fled, and became exiled in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons.
And forty years having been passed, an angel appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire of a bush.
And Moses having seen it, marveled at the vision. And of him coming near to behold it, there was the voice of the Lord:
‘I am the God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob.’ And Moses, having become terrified, did not dare to look.
And the Lord said to him, ‘Take off the sandal of your feet, for the place on which you stand is holy ground.
Having seen, I saw the oppression of My people in Egypt, and I have heard their groans, and I have come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send you to Egypt.’
This Moses whom they rejected, having said, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge?’—him whom God sent and as ruler and redeemer by the hand of the angel having appeared to him in the bush—
this one led them out, having done wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years.
This is the Moses having said to the sons of Israel, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me out from your brothers.’
This is the one having been in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel speaking to him in Mount Sinai, and who was with our fathers. He received living oracles to give to us,
to whom our fathers were not willing to be obedient, but thrust away, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,
having said to Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us. As for this Moses who brought us out from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him.’
And in those days they made a calf and offered a sacrifice to the idol and were rejoicing in the works of their hands.
But God turned away and delivered them to worship the host of heaven, as it has been written in the book of the prophets: ‘Did you offer slain beasts and sacrifices to Me forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
And you took up the tabernacle of Moloch and the star of your god Rephan, the images that you made to worship them; and I will remove you beyond Babylon.’
The tabernacle of the testimony was with our fathers in the wilderness, just as the One speaking to Moses had commanded to make it according to the pattern that he had seen,
also which, having received by succession, our fathers brought in with Joshua in taking possession of the nations whom God drove out from the face of our fathers, until the days of David,
who found favor before God and asked to find a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon built Him the house.
Yet the Most High does not dwell in hand-made houses. As the prophet says:
‘Heaven is My throne, and the earth a footstool of My feet. What kind of house will you build Me, says the Lord, or what is the place of My rest?
Has not My hand made all these things?’
You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers did, also do you.
Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those having foretold about the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers,
you who received the Law by the ordination of angels, and have not kept it.”
Now hearing these things, they were cut to their hearts and began gnashing the teeth at him.
But he being full of the Holy Spirit, having looked intently into heaven, saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God,
and he said, “Behold, I see the heavens having been opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.”
And having cried out with a loud voice, they held their ears and rushed upon him with one accord,
and having cast him out of the city, began to stone him. And the witnesses laid aside their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
And as they were stoning Stephen, he was calling out and saying, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
And having fallen on his knees, he cried in a loud voice, “Lord, do not place this sin to them.” And having said this, he fell asleep.
And Saul was there consenting to his killing. And on that day a great persecution arose against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria.
Now devout men buried Stephen and made great lamentation over him.
But Saul was destroying the church. Entering houses after houses and dragging off men and women, he was delivering them to prison.
Therefore indeed those having been scattered went about preaching the word.
Now Philip, having gone down to a city of Samaria, was proclaiming the Christ to them.
And the crowds with one accord were giving heed to the things being spoken by Philip in the time for them to hear and to see the signs that he was performing.
For from many of those having unclean spirits, they were coming out, crying in a loud voice. And many having been paralyzed and lame were healed.
So there was great joy in that city.
Now a certain man named Simon had formerly been practicing sorcery in the city and amazing the people of Samaria, declaring himself to be someone great,
to whom all were giving heed, from small to great, saying, “This one is the power of God that is called Great.”
Now they were giving heed to him because for a long time he had amazed them with the magic arts.
But when they believed Philip, proclaiming the gospel concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
And Simon himself also believed, and having been baptized, was steadfastly continuing with Philip. And beholding the signs and great miracles being performed, he was amazed.
Now the apostles in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John,
who having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit.
For He was not yet fallen upon any of them, but they had only been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they began laying the hands upon them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
Now of Simon having seen that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered to them money,
saying, “Give also to me this authority, that on whomever I may lay the hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.”
But Peter said to him, “Your silver, may it perish with you, because you thought the gift of God to be obtained by money!
To you there is no part nor lot in this matter, for your heart is not right before God.
Repent, therefore, of this wickedness of yours, and pray earnestly to the Lord, if indeed the intent of your heart will be forgiven you.
For I see you being in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity.”
And Simon answering said, “You pray earnestly to the Lord on behalf of me, so that nothing of which you have spoken may come upon me.”
Therefore they indeed, having earnestly testified and having spoken the word of the Lord, traveled back to Jerusalem, and they were preaching the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans.
Now an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, “Rise up and go toward the south, to the road going down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” (This is the desert road.)
And having risen up, he went. And behold, an Ethiopian eunuch, a potentate of Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.
And he was returning and sitting in his chariot, and he was reading the prophet Isaiah.
And the Spirit said to Philip, “Go near and join yourself to this chariot.”
And Philip having run up, heard him reading Isaiah the prophet and said, “Do you then understand what you are reading?”
And he said, “How indeed could I be able, unless someone will guide me?” And he invited Philip, having come up, to sit with him.
Now the passage of Scripture that he was reading was this: “He was led as a sheep to slaughter, and as a lamb before the one shearing him is silent, so He does not open His mouth.
In His humiliation, justice was taken away from Him. Who will describe His generation? For His life is removed from the earth.”
And the eunuch answering said to Philip, “I beseech you, concerning whom does the prophet say this? Concerning himself, or concerning some other?”
And Philip, having opened his mouth and having begun from this Scripture, proclaimed the good news to him—Jesus.
And as they were going along the road they came upon some water, and the eunuch says, “Behold, water! What prevents me to be baptized?”

And he commanded the chariot to stop. And they both went down to the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
Now when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord carried away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer. For he went his way rejoicing.
But Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through, he was proclaiming the gospel to all the towns until his coming to Caesarea.
Meanwhile, Saul still breathing out threats and murder toward the disciples of the Lord, having gone to the high priest,
requested letters from him to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any being of the way, both men and women, having bound them, he might bring them to Jerusalem.
Now in proceeding, it came to pass as he draws near to Damascus, suddenly also a light from heaven flashed around him.
And having fallen on the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?”
And he said, “Who are You, Lord?” And He said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But rise up and enter into the city, and it will be told you that which it behooves you to do.”
And the men traveling with him stood speechless, hearing the voice indeed, but seeing no one.
And Saul rose up from the ground, but of his eyes having been opened, he could see nothing. And leading him by the hand, they brought him to Damascus.
And he was three days without seeing, and neither did he eat nor drink.
Now there was a certain disciple in Damascus named Ananias. And the Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias!” And he said, “Behold me, Lord.”
And the Lord said to him, “Having risen up, go into the street called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas the one of Tarsus named Saul, for behold, he is praying,
and he saw in a vision a man named Ananias, having come and having put the hands on him, so that he might see again.”
But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many concerning this man, how many evils he did to Your saints in Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all those calling on Your name.”
But the Lord said to him, “Go, for this man is My vessel of choice to carry My name before the Gentiles, and also kings, and the sons of Israel.
For I will show to him how much it behooves him to suffer for My name.”
And Ananias went away and entered into the house; and having laid the hands upon him, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, the One having appeared to you on the road by which you were coming, has sent me that you may see again and be filled of the Holy Spirit.”
And immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he regained his sight. And having risen up, he was baptized,
and having taken food, he was strengthened. And he was some days with the disciples in Damascus.
And immediately he began proclaiming Jesus in the synagogues, that He is the Son of God.
And all those hearing were amazed and were saying, “Is this not the one having ravaged those in Jerusalem calling on this name? And he had come here for this, that he might bring them, having been bound, to the chief priests.”
But Saul was empowered all the more and kept confounding the Jews dwelling in Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
Now when many days had passed, the Jews plotted together to kill him,
but their plot became known to Saul. And now they were closely watching the gates day and also night, so that they might kill him.
But having taken him by night, his disciples let him down through the wall, having lowered him in a basket.
And having arrived in Jerusalem, he was attempting to join the disciples, and all were afraid of him, not believing that he is a disciple.
But Barnabas having taken him, brought him to the apostles and related to them how he had seen the Lord on the road, and that He had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
And he was coming in and going out with them in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of Lord.
And he was speaking and was debating with the Hellenists. But they were seeking to kill him.
But the brothers having known it, brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.
Then indeed the churches throughout all of Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified. And going on in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.
Now it came to pass that Peter, passing through all quarters, also went down to the saints inhabiting Lydda.
And he found there a certain man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed, lying on a bed for eight years.
And Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you; rise up and make the bed for yourself.” And immediately he rose up.
And all those inhabiting Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
Now in Joppa there was a certain disciple named Tabitha, which translated is called Dorcas. She was full of good works and of alms that she continually did.
But in those days it came to pass that, having become sick, she died. And having washed her, they put her in an upper room.
Now Lydda being near Joppa, the disciples having heard that Peter is in it, sent two men to him, imploring, “Do not to delay coming to us.”
And Peter having risen up, went with them, who having arrived, brought him into the upper room. And all the widows stood by him, weeping and showing the tunics and garments that Dorcas had made, being with them.
And Peter having put all outside and having bowed the knees, prayed. And having turned to the body he said, “Tabitha, arise!” And she opened her eyes, and having seen Peter, she sat up.
And having given her his hand, he raised her up. And having called the saints and the widows, he presented her living.
And it became known throughout all of Joppa, and many believed on the Lord.
And it came to pass, he stayed many days in Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner.
Now a certain man in Caesarea named Cornelius was a centurion of the Cohort that is called Italian,
devout and fearing God with all his household, doing many alms to the people and praying to God continually.
About the ninth hour of the day, he saw clearly in a vision an angel of God having come to him and having said to him, “Cornelius!”
And having looked intently on him, and having become afraid, he said, “What is it, Lord?” And he said to him, “Your prayers and your alms have ascended as a memorial before God.
And now send men to Joppa and summon a man named Simon who is called Peter.
He lodges with a certain Simon, a tanner whose house is by the sea.”
And when the angel speaking to him had departed, having called two of the servants and a devout soldier of those who are attending him,
and having related all things to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Now on the next day as these are journeying and are approaching the city, Peter went up on the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.
And he became hungry and desired to eat, but as they were preparing, a trance fell upon him,
and he beholds heaven opening, and a certain vessel as a great sheet descending, being let down upon the earth by four corners,
in which were all the quadrupeds and creeping things of the earth, and birds of heaven.
And a voice came to him: “Having risen up, Peter, kill and eat!”
But Peter said, “In no way, Lord! For never have I eaten anything common or unclean.”
And a voice came again to him for the second time: “What God has cleansed, you do not call common.”
Now this took place for three times, and immediately the vessel was taken up into heaven.
And while Peter was perplexed in himself what the vision that he had seen might be, behold, the men having been sent from Cornelius, having inquired for the house of Simon, stood at the gate.
And having called out, they were asking if Simon who is called Peter is lodged here.
And of Peter thinking over the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three men are seeking you.
But having risen, go down and proceed with them, doubting nothing, because I have sent them.”
And Peter, having gone down to the men, said, “Behold, I am whom you seek; what is the cause for which you are here?”
And they said, “Cornelius a centurion, a righteous and God fearing man—and being well testified to by the whole nation of the Jews—was divinely instructed by a holy angel to send for you to his house and to hear a message from you.”
Therefore having called them in, he lodged them. And on the next day having risen up, he went forth with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa went with him.
And on the next day, he entered into Caesarea. Now Cornelius was expecting them, having called together his relatives and close friends.
And as Peter was entering, Cornelius, having met him, having fallen at the feet, worshiped him.
But Peter lifted him up, saying, “Rise up, I myself am also a man.”
And talking with him, he entered, and he finds many having gathered together.
And he was saying to them, “You know how unlawful it is for a Jew to unite himself or to come near to a foreigner. But God has shown me not to call any man common or unclean.
So also without objection I came, having been summoned. Therefore I inquire, for what reason did you summon me?”
And Cornelius was saying, “Four days ago, until this hour, the ninth hour, I was praying in my house; and behold, a man in bright apparel stood before me,
and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard and your alms have been remembered before God.
Therefore send to Joppa and call for Simon, who is called Peter; He lodges in the house of Simon, a tanner by the sea.’
Therefore I sent to you at once, and you did well, having come. Now therefore, we are all present before God to hear all the things having been commanded you by the Lord.”
And Peter, having opened the mouth, said, “Of a truth I understand that God is not One who shows partiality,
but in every nation, the one fearing Him and working righteousness is acceptable to Him,
the word that He sent to the sons of Israel, proclaiming the gospel, peace by Jesus Christ—He is Lord of all.
You yourselves know the declaration having come through all Judea, having begun from Galilee, after the baptism that John proclaimed:
Jesus from Nazareth, how God anointed Him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all those being oppressed by the devil, because God was with Him.
And we are witnesses of all things that He did, both in the region of the Jews and in Jerusalem, whom they also put to death, having hanged Him on a tree.
This One God raised up on the third day, and gave Him to become manifest,
not to all the people, but to the witnesses having been chosen beforehand by God, to us who did eat with and drink with Him after His rising out from the dead.
And He instructed us to proclaim to the people and to testify fully that He is the One having been appointed by God as judge of the living and the dead.
To Him all the prophets bear witness that everyone believing in Him receives forgiveness of sins through His name.”
Of Peter still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all those hearing the word.
And the believers from the circumcision, as many as had come with Peter, were amazed that the gift of the Holy Spirit has been poured out even upon the Gentiles.
For they were hearing them speaking in tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,
“Is anyone able to withhold the water to baptize these who have received the Holy Spirit, just as we also have?”
And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to remain some days.
Now the apostles and the brothers being in Judea heard that Gentiles also had received the word of God.
And when Peter went up to Jerusalem, those of the circumcision began contending with him,
saying, “You went to men having uncircumcision, and ate with them.”
Now Peter having begun, set forth to them in order, saying,
“I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a certain vessel like a great sheet descending, being let down out of heaven by four corners, and it came down as far as me.
Having looked intently on it, I was observing it, and I saw the quadrupeds of the earth and the wild beasts and the creeping things and the birds of the air.
And also I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Having risen up, Peter, kill and eat.’
But I said, ‘In no way, Lord. For nothing ever common or unclean has entered into my mouth.’
But for a second time the voice answered out of heaven, ‘What God has cleansed, you do not call unholy.’
Now this happened on three times, and all was drawn up into heaven again.
And behold, immediately three men having been sent to me from Caesarea stood at the house in which I was.
Now the Spirit told me to go with them, not having discriminated. Now these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the man’s house,
and he related to us how he had seen the angel having stood in his house and having said, ‘Send forth to Joppa, and send for Simon who is called Peter,
who will speak words to you in which will be saved, you and all your household.’
And in my beginning to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, even as also upon us in the beginning.
And I remembered the word of the Lord, how He had said, ‘John indeed baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
If then God has given to them the same gift as also to us having believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, how was I able to forbid God?”
And having heard these things, they were silent and glorified God, saying, “Then indeed God has given also to the Gentiles repentance unto life.”
So indeed those having been scattered by the tribulation having taken place over Stephen passed through to Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to Jews alone.
But some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who having come into Antioch, were speaking also to the Hellenists, proclaiming the gospel—the Lord Jesus.
And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number, having believed, turned to the Lord.
Now the report concerning them was heard in the ears of the church being in Jerusalem, and they sent forth Barnabas to go as far as Antioch,
who having come and having seen the grace of God, rejoiced and was exhorting all to abide in the Lord with resolute purpose of heart.
For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a large crowd was added to the Lord.
And he went forth to Tarsus to seek Saul,
and having found him, he brought him to Antioch. Now it came to pass that they also gathered together an entire year in the church, and taught a large crowd. And in Antioch the disciples were first called Christians.
Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
And one of them named Agabus, having risen up, signified by the Spirit that a great famine is about to be over the whole world—which came to pass under Claudius.
And the disciples, as anyone was prospered, each of them determined to send for ministry to the brothers dwelling in Judea,
which also they did, having sent it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
Now at that time, Herod the king put forth the hands to mistreat some of those of the church.
And he put to death James the brother of John with the sword.
And having seen that it is pleasing to the Jews, he proceeded to take Peter also—now these were the days of the Unleavened Bread—
whom also, having seized, he put in prison, having delivered him to four sets of four soldiers to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
So indeed Peter was kept in the prison, but fervent prayer was being made to God by the church concerning him.
And when Herod was about to bring him forth, on that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, having been bound with two chains, and guards before the door were watching the prison.
And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by, and a light shone in the cell. And having struck Peter’s side, he woke him up, saying, “Rise up in haste.” And his chains fell off the hands.
And the angel said to him, “Gird yourself about, and put on your sandals.” And He did so. And he says to him, “Wrap around you your cloak and follow me.”
And having gone forth, he was following, and he did not know that what is happening by means of the angel is real, but he was thinking he saw a vision.
And having passed through a first and a second guard, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened to them by itself. And having gone out, they went on through one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
And having come to himself, Peter said, “Now I know truly that the Lord has sent forth His angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the people of the Jews.”
And having considered it, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, who is called Mark, where there were many having gathered together and praying.
And of him having knocked at the door of the gate, a girl named Rhoda came to answer.
And having recognized Peter’s voice, from joy she did not open the gate, but having run in, she reported Peter to be standing before the gate.
But they said to her, “You are out of your mind.” But she kept insisting it to be so. And they kept saying, “It is his angel.”
But Peter continued knocking. And having opened it, they saw him and were amazed.
And having made a sign to them with the hand to be silent, he related to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, “Report these things to James and to the brothers.” And having gone out, he went to another place.
Now day having come, there was no small disturbance among the soldiers what then has become of Peter.
And Herod having sought after him and not having found him, having examined the guards, commanded them to be led away to death. And having gone down from Judea to Caesarea, he stayed there.
Now he had been furiously angry with the Tyrians and Sidonians, and they came to him with one accord. And having gained Blastus, who was over the bedchamber of the king, they were seeking peace because of their region being nourished by the king’s.
Now on the appointed day Herod, having put on the royal apparel and having sat on the throne, was making an address to them.
And the people were crying out, “This is the voice of a god and not of a man!”
And immediately an angel of the Lord struck him in return for that he did not give the glory to God. And having been eaten by worms, he breathed his last.
But the word of God continued to grow and to multiply.
And Barnabas and Saul returned, having fulfilled the mission to Jerusalem, having taken with them John the one having been called Mark.
Now there were prophets and teachers in Antioch in the church being there, both Barnabas and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
Now as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart then to Me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
Then having fasted and having prayed and having laid the hands on them, they sent them off.
Therefore indeed having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia, and they sailed from there to Cyprus.
And having come into Salamis, they began proclaiming the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they also had John as a helper.
Now having passed through the whole island as far as Paphos, they found a certain magician, a Jewish false prophet whose name was Bar-Jesus,
who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. He, having summoned Barnabas and Saul, desired to hear the word of God.
But Elymas the magician (for his name means thus) was opposing them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith.
And Saul, the one also called Paul, having been filled the Holy Spirit, having looked intently upon him,
said, “O full of all deceit and all craft, son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease perverting the straight ways the of Lord?
And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun during a season.” And immediately mist and darkness fell upon him, and going about, he was seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
Then the proconsul, having seen that having happened, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
And those around Paul, having sailed from Paphos, came to Perga of Pamphylia. But John, having departed from them, returned to Jerusalem.
Now having passed through from Perga, they came to Antioch of Pisidia, and having gone into the synagogue on the day of the Sabbaths, they sat down.
And after the reading of the Law and of the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, “Men, brothers, if there is any word of exhortation among you toward the people, speak.”
And Paul, having risen up and having made a sign with the hand, said, “Men of Israel and those fearing God, listen:
The God of this people Israel chose our fathers and exalted the people in the sojourn in the land of Egypt, and with uplifted arm He brought them out of it,
and for a period of about forty years He endured their ways in the wilderness,
and having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, He gave as an inheritance their land—
during four hundred and fifty years. And after these things, He gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
Then they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
And having removed him, He raised up David to them as king, to whom also He said, having carried witness: ‘I have found David the son of Jesse a man according to My heart, who will do all My will.’
Of the seed of this man, according to promise, God raised up to Israel the Savior, Jesus—
John having proclaimed before the face of His coming a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
And while John was fulfilling the course, he was saying, ‘Whom do you suppose me to be? I am not He, but behold, He comes after me, of whom I am not worthy to untie a sandal of the feet.’
Men, brothers, sons of the family of Abraham, and those among you fearing God, to us the message of this salvation has been sent.
For those dwelling in Jerusalem and their rulers, not having known Him and the voices of the prophets that are being read on every Sabbath, having condemned Him, they fulfilled them.
And having found no cause of death, they begged Pilate to put Him to death.
And when they had finished all the things having been written about Him, having taken Him down from the tree, they put Him in a tomb.
But God raised Him out from the dead,
who appeared for many days to those having come up with Him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now His witnesses to the people.
And we preach the gospel to you, the promise having been made to the fathers,
that God has fulfilled this to us their children, having raised up Jesus, as also it has been written in the second psalm: ‘You are My Son, today I have begotten you.’
And that He raised Him out from the dead, no more being about to return to decay, He spoke thus: ‘I will give to you the holy and sure blessings of David.’
Therefore He also says in another: ‘You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.’
For indeed David, having served the purpose of God in his own generation, fell asleep and was added to his fathers, and saw decay.
But the One God raised up did not see decay.
Therefore be it known to you, men, brothers, that through this One, forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
And in Him everyone believing is justified from all things from which you were not able to be justified in the Law of Moses.
Take heed therefore, lest that having been said in the prophets might come about:
‘Behold, scoffers, and wonder and perish; for I am working a work in your days, a work that you would never believe, even if one should declare it to you.’”
And they having departed, they were begging these words to be spoken to them on the next Sabbath.
And the synagogue having broken up, many of the Jews and worshipping converts followed Paul and Barnabas, who, speaking to them, kept persuading them to continue in the grace of God.
And on the coming Sabbath, almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of the Lord.
But the Jews, having seen the crowds, were filled with jealousy, and began contradicting the things spoken by Paul, blaspheming.
And Paul and Barnabas, having spoken boldly, said, “It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you. But since you thrust it away and do not judge yourselves worthy of eternal life, behold, we are turning to the Gentiles.
For thus the Lord has commanded us: ‘I have set you for a light of the Gentiles, you to be for salvation to the uttermost part of the earth.’”
And the Gentiles hearing it were rejoicing and glorifying the word of the Lord, and as many as were appointed to eternal life believed.
And the word of the Lord was carried through the whole region.
But the Jews incited the worshipping women of honorable position and the principals of the city, and they stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas and expelled them from their district.
But having shaken off the dust of the feet against them, they went to Iconium;
and the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.
Now it came to pass in Iconium, according to the same, they entered into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke so that a great number of both Jewish and Greeks believed.
But the unbelieving Jews stirred up and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against the brothers.
Therefore indeed they stayed a long time, speaking boldly for the Lord, bearing witness to the word of His grace, granting signs and wonders to be done through their hands.
Now the multitude of the city was divided, and indeed some were with the Jews, but some with the apostles.
And when there was a rush both of the Gentiles and Jews, with their rulers, to mistreat and to stone them,
having become aware, they fled to the Lycaonian cities Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding region,
and there they continued preaching the gospel.
And in Lystra a certain man was sitting, crippled in the feet, lame from the womb of his mother, who had never walked.
This man heard Paul speaking, who having looked intently at him and having seen that he has faith to be healed,
said in a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet!” And he sprang up and began to walk.
And the crowds having seen what Paul had done, lifted up their voice in Lycaonian saying, “The gods have come down to us, having become like men.”
And Barnabas, they began calling Zeus; and Paul, Hermes, because he was the leading speaker.
And the priest of Zeus, being just outside the city, having brought oxen and wreaths to the gates, was desiring with the crowds to sacrifice.
But the apostles Barnabas and Paul having heard, having torn their garments, rushed out into the crowd, crying out
and saying, “Men, why do you do these things? We also are men of like nature with you, proclaiming the gospel to you, to turn from these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them,
who in the generations past allowed all the nations to go their own ways.
And yet He has not left Himself without witness, doing good, giving to you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.”
And saying these things, they hardly stopped the crowds from sacrificing to them.
But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded the crowds, and having stoned Paul, they dragged him outside the city, supposing him to have died.
But the disciples having surrounded him, having risen up, he entered into the city. And on the next day he went away with Barnabas to Derbe.
And having proclaimed the gospel to that city and having discipled many, they returned to Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antioch,
strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith and that “through many tribulations it behooves us to enter into the kingdom of God.”
Now having chosen elders for them in every church, having prayed, with fasting they committed them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
And having passed through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia,
and having spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
And from there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work that they had fulfilled.
Now having arrived and having gathered together the church, they began declaring all that God had done with them, and that He had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
And they remained no little time with the disciples.
But certain ones having come down from Judea were teaching the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you are not able to be saved.”
Having been brought about, then, no small commotion and discussion by Paul and Barnabas with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas and certain others out from them to go up to Jerusalem, to the apostles and elders, about this question.
Therefore indeed having been sent forward by the church, they were passing through both Phoenicia and Samaria, relating in detail the conversion of the Gentiles, and they were bringing great joy to all the brothers.
And having come to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and the elders. And they declared all that God had done with them.
Now certain of those who believed, from the sect of the Pharisees, rose up, saying, “It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses.”
And both the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter.
And much discussion having taken place, Peter having risen up, said to them, “Men, brothers, you know that from the early days God chose among you for the Gentiles to hear by my mouth the word of the gospel, and to believe.
And the heart-knowing God bore witness to them, having given them the Holy Spirit, as also to us.
And He made no distinction between both us and them, having purified their hearts by the faith.
Now therefore, why are you testing God, to put upon the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?
But we believe ourselves to be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same manner as they also are.”
Now the whole multitude kept silent and were listening to Barnabas and Paul relating what signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles by them.
And after they were silent, James answered, saying, “Men, brothers, hear me.
Simeon has related how God first visited to take out of the Gentiles a people for His name.
And the words of the prophets agree with this, as it is written:
‘After these things I will return and will rebuild the tabernacle of David which has fallen, and its ruins I will rebuild, and I will set it upright,
so that the remnant of men may seek out the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom has been called My name, upon them, says the Lord, doing these things,
known from eternity.’
Therefore I judge not to trouble those from the Gentiles turning to God,
but to write to them to abstain from the pollutions of idols, and sexual immorality, and that which is strangled, and from blood.
For Moses has ones proclaiming him in every city from generations of old, being read in the synagogues on every Sabbath.”
Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole church, having chosen out from them, to send men to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas and Silas, leading men among the brothers,
having written by their hand: “The apostles and the elders, brothers, To those brothers among the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia: Greetings.
Inasmuch as we have heard that some went out from us, to whom we had given no instructions, and troubled you by words, upsetting your minds,
it seemed good to us, having come with one accord, having chosen men to send to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
men having handed over their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, and they are telling you the same things by word of mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us, to lay upon you no further burden, except these necessary things:
to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality. Keeping yourselves from these, you will do well. Farewell.”
Therefore indeed having been sent off, they went to Antioch, and having gathered the multitude, they delivered the letter.
And having read it, they rejoiced at the encouragement.
Both Judas and Silas, also being prophets themselves, exhorted and strengthened the brothers by much talk.
And having continued a time, they were sent away in peace from the brothers to those having sent them.

But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and proclaiming the good news, the word of the Lord, with many others also.
Now after some days, Paul said to Barnabas, “Indeed, having turned back, let us look after the brothers, how they are, in every city in which we have announced the word of the Lord.”
Now Barnabas purposed also to take along John, called Mark.
But Paul thought fit not to take him along, the one having withdrawn from them from Pamphylia and not having gone with them to the work.
Therefore a sharp disagreement arose, so that they separated from one another. And Barnabas having taken Mark, sailed to Cyprus.
But Paul, having chosen Silas, went forth, having been committed to the grace of the Lord by the brothers.
And he was passing through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
And he came also to Derbe and to Lystra. And behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman and a Greek father,
who was well spoken of by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.
Paul wanted this one to go forth with him, and having taken him, he circumcised him on account of the Jews being in those parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
And while they were passing through the cities, they were delivering to them to keep the decrees decided on by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem.
So indeed the churches were strengthened in the faith and were increasing in number every day.
And having passed through Phrygia and the Galatian region, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
and having come down to Mysia, they were attempting to go into Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them.
And having passed by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
And a vision appeared to Paul during the night: A certain man of Macedonia was standing and beseeching him and saying, “Having passed over into Macedonia, help us.”
Now when he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.
And having sailed from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and on the following day to Neapolis,
and from there to Philippi, which is the leading city of the district of Macedonia, a colony. Now we were staying some days in this city.
And on the day of the Sabbaths, we went forth outside the city gate, by a river, where there was customary to be a place of prayer. And having sat down, we began speaking to the women having gathered.
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple of the city of Thyatira, worshiping God, was listening. The Lord opened her heart to attend to the things being spoken by Paul.
And when she was baptized, and her house, she begged, saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, having entered into my house, abide.” And she persuaded us.
Now it happened of us going to the place of prayer, a certain girl, having a spirit of Python, met us, who was bringing her masters much gain by fortune-telling.
Having followed Paul and us, she was crying out, saying, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation.”
And she continued this for many days. And Paul having been distressed and having turned, said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out from her.” And it came out that hour.
Now her masters having seen that their hope of profit was gone, having taken hold of Paul and Silas, dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.
And having brought them up to the magistrates, they said, “These men, being Jews, exceedingly trouble our city
and preach customs that it is not lawful for us, being Romans, to accept nor to practice.”
And the crowd rose up together against them, and the magistrates having torn off their garments, were commanding that they be beaten with rods.
And having laid many blows on them, they cast them into prison, having charged the jailer to keep them securely,
who having received such an order, threw them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.
Now toward midnight, Paul and Silas praying, were singing praises to God. And the prisoners were listening to them.
And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that foundations of the prison house were shaken, and immediately all the doors were opened, and the chains of all were loosed.
And the jailer having been awoken and having seen the doors of the prison open, having drawn his sword was about to kill himself, supposing the prisoners to have escaped.
But Paul called out in a loud voice saying, “Do not harm yourself, for we are all here!”
And having called for lights, he rushed in, and having become terrified, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
And having brought them out, he was saying, “Sirs, what is necessary of me to do, that I may be saved?”
And they said, “Believe on the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your household.”
And they spoke the word of the Lord to him along with all those in his house.
And having taken them in that hour of the night, he washed them from the wounds, and immediately he was baptized, and all his household.
And having brought them into the house, he laid a table for them and rejoiced with all his household, having believed in God.
And day having come, the magistrates sent the officers, saying, “Release those men.”
And the jailer reported these words to Paul: “The captains have sent that you may be let go. Now therefore having gone out, depart in peace.”
But Paul was saying to them, “Having beaten us publicly, uncondemned men being Romans, they cast us into prison, and now do they throw us out secretly? No indeed! Instead, having come themselves, let them bring us out.”
And the officers reported these words to the captains, and they were afraid, having heard that they are Romans.
And having come, they appealed to them, and having brought them out, they were asking them to go out of the city.
And having gone forth out of the prison, they came to Lydia, and having seen them, they exhorted the brothers and departed.
And having passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
And according to the custom with Paul, he went in to them and for three Sabbaths reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
opening and setting forth that it behooved the Christ to have suffered and to have risen out from the dead, and that “this Jesus whom I preach to you is the Christ.”
And some of them were obedient and joined themselves to Paul and to Silas, along with a great multitude of the worshipping Greeks, and not a few of the leading women.
Now the Jews having become jealous, and having taken to them certain wicked men of the market-loungers, and having collected a crowd, set the city in uproar. And having assailed the house of Jason, they were seeking them to bring out to the people.
But not having found them, they dragged Jason and certain brothers before the city authorities, crying out, “These ones having upset the world come here also,
whom Jason has received. And these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, proclaiming another to be king, Jesus.”
And they stirred up the crowd and the city authorities, hearing these things.
And having taken security from Jason and the rest, they let go them.
And the brothers sent away both Paul and Silas immediately by night to Berea, who having arrived, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
Now these, who were more noble than those in Thessalonica, received the word with all readiness, on every day examining the Scriptures, whether these things were so.
Therefore many of them indeed believed, and not a few of the prominent Grecian women and men.
But when the Jews from Thessalonica learned that the word of God also was proclaimed by Paul in Berea, they came there also, stirring up and agitating the crowds.
And then immediately the brothers sent away Paul to go as to the sea. And both Silas and Timothy remained there.
Now those escorting Paul brought him unto Athens, and having received a command unto Silas and Timothy that as quickly as possible they should come to him, they departed.
Now of Paul in Athens waiting for them, his spirit was provoked in him, seeing the city to be utterly idolatrous.
So indeed he was reasoning in the synagogue with the Jews and those worshiping, and in the marketplace on every day with those meeting him.
And also some of the Epicureans and Stoics, philosophers, encountered him, and some were saying, “What may this babbler desire to say?” but others, “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign gods,” because he was proclaiming the gospel of Jesus and the resurrection.
And having taken hold of him they brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “Are we able to know what is this new teaching which is spoken by you.
For you are bringing some strange things to our ears. We resolve therefore to know what these things wish to be.”
Now all the Athenians and the visiting strangers spent their time in nothing else than to tell something and to hear something new.
And Paul, having stood in the midst of the Areopagus, was saying, “Men, Athenians, I behold that in all things you are very religious.
For passing through and beholding your objects of worship, I even found an altar on which had been inscribed: To an unknown God. Therefore whom you worship not knowing, Him I proclaim to you.
The God having made the world and all things that are in it, He being Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in hand-made temples,
nor is He served by hands of men as needing anything, Himself giving to all life and breath and everything.
And He made from one man every nation of men, to dwell upon all the face of the earth, having determined the appointed times and the boundaries of their habitation,
to seek God, if perhaps indeed they might palpate for Him, and might find Him. And indeed, He is not far from each one of us.
‘For in Him we live and move and are.’ As also some of the poets among you have said, ‘For we are also His offspring.’
Therefore, being offspring of God, we ought not to consider the Divine Being to be like to gold or to silver or to stone, a graven thing of man’s craft and imagination.
So indeed God, having overlooked the times of ignorance, now commands all men everywhere to repent,
because He set a day in which He is about to judge the world in righteousness by a man whom He appointed, having provided a guarantee to all, having raised Him out from the dead.”
Now having heard of a resurrection of the dead, some indeed began to mock him, but some said, “We will hear you concerning this again also.”
Thus Paul went out from their midst.
But some men, having joined themselves to him, believed, among whom also were Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
And after these things, having departed from Athens, he came to Corinth.
And having found a certain Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, and Priscilla his wife, recently having come from Italy because of Claudius having commanded all the Jews to depart out of Rome, he came to them,
and because of being of the same trade, he stayed with them and worked. For they were tentmakers by the trade.
And he was reasoning in the synagogue on every Sabbath, persuading both Jews and Greeks.
Now when both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was occupied with the word, earnestly testifying to the Jews Jesus to be the Christ.
But of them opposing and reviling him, having shaken out the garments, he said to them, “Your blood be upon your head; I am clean. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.”
And having departed from there, he came to the house of a certain one named Titius Justus, worshiping God, whose house was adjoining the synagogue.
And Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord, with his all household. And many of the Corinthians hearing believed and were baptized.
Now the Lord said to Paul through a vision in the night, “Do not fear, but continue speaking, and do not be silent,
because I am with you, and no one will lay a hand on you to harm you, because there are many people to me in this city.”
And he remained a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But Gallio being proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and led him to the judgment seat,
saying, “This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the Law.”
Now Paul being about to open the mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, “If indeed it was some unrighteousness or wicked crime, O Jews, according to reason I would have endured with you.
But if it is a question about a word, and names, and in reference to your law, you will see to it yourselves. I resolve not to be a judge of these things.”
And he drove them from the judgment seat.
Then all of them, having seized Sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue, began to beat him before the judgment seat. And it mattered nothing to Gallio about these things.
Now Paul, having remained many days more, having taken leave of the brothers, sailed away to Syria—and with him Priscilla and Aquila—having shaved the head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.
Now they came to Ephesus, and left them there. And he himself having entered into the synagogue, reasoned with the Jews.
Now of them asking him to remain for a longer time, he did not consent,
but having taken leave and having said, “I will return to you again, God willing,” he sailed from Ephesus,
and having landed at Caesarea, having gone up and having greeted the church, he went down to Antioch.
And having stayed some time, he went forth, passing successively through the Galatian region and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus, being an eloquent man, mighty in the Scriptures.
He was instructed in the way of the Lord. And being fervent in spirit, he was speaking and was teaching earnestly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John.
And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But Priscilla and Aquila having heard him, took him to them and expounded the way of God to him more accurately.
And he resolving to pass through into Achaia, the brothers, having encouraged him, wrote to the disciples to welcome him, who having arrived, helped greatly those having believed through grace.
For he was powerfully refuting the Jews publicly, showing by the Scriptures Jesus to be the Christ.
Now it came to pass, while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper parts to come to Ephesus, and having found certain disciples,
he also said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit, having believed?” And they said to him, “But not even did we hear that there is a Holy Spirit.”
And he said, “Into what then were you baptized?” And they said, “Into the baptism of John.”
Then Paul said, “John baptized a baptism of repentance, telling the people that they should believe in the One coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
And having heard, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
And of Paul having laid the hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they were speaking in tongues and prophesying.
And there were in all about twelve men.
And having entered into the synagogue, he was speaking boldly for three months, reasoning and persuading them concerning the kingdom of God.
But when some were hardened and were disbelieving, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, having departed from them, he took the disciples separately, reasoning every day in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
And this continued for two years, so that all those inhabiting Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
And God was performing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul,
so that even handkerchiefs or aprons from his skin were brought to the ailing, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits left.
Now some of the itinerant Jews, exorcists, also attempted to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those having evil spirits, saying, “I adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul proclaims.”
And seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish high priest, were doing this.
But the evil spirit answering, said to them, “Jesus I know, and Paul I am acquainted with; but you, who are you?”
And the man in whom was the evil spirit, having leapt on them, having overpowered them all, prevailed against them so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
Now this became known to all those inhabiting Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks. And fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was being magnified.
And many of those having believed were coming, confessing and declaring their deeds,
and many of those having practiced the magic arts, having brought the books, burned them before all. And they counted up the prices of them and found it five myriads of silverlings.
Thus the word of the Lord continued to increase and prevail with might.
Now after these things were fulfilled, Paul purposed in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem, having passed through Macedonia and Achaia, having said, “After my having been there, it behooves me to see Rome also.”
And having sent two of those ministering to him, Timothy and Erastus, into Macedonia, he remained for a time in Asia.
Now at the same time no small disturbance arose concerning the Way.
For a certain silversmith named Demetrius, making silver shrines of Artemis, was bringing no little business to the craftsmen,
whom having brought together along with the workmen in such things, he said, “Men, you know that from this business is our wealth.
And you see and hear that not only in Ephesus, but almost all of Asia, this Paul, having persuaded them, has turned away a great many people, saying that they are not gods which have been made by hands.
Now not only is this business to us endangered to come into disrepute, but also for the temple of the great goddess Artemis to be reckoned for nothing, and also her majesty to be deposed, whom all Asia and the world worship.”
And having heard, and having become full of rage, they were crying out saying, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians.”
And the whole city was filled with confusion, and with one accord they rushed to the theatre, having dragged off Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, fellow travelers of Paul.
But of Paul intending to go in to the people, the disciples would not allow him.
And also some of the Asiarchs being friends to him, having sent to him, were urging him not to venture into the theatre.
So some indeed were crying out one thing; others another. For the assembly was confused, and most did not know for what cause they were assembled.
Now out of the crowd they put forward Alexander, the Jews having thrust him forward. And Alexander, having motioned with the hand, was wanting to make a defense to the people.
But having recognized that he is a Jew, there was one cry from all, ongoing about two hours, crying out, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians.”
Then having calmed the crowd, the town clerk says, “Men, Ephesians, what man is there indeed who does not know the city of the Ephesians as being temple-keeper of the great Artemis, and of that fallen from the sky?
Therefore these things being undeniable, it is necessary for you to be calm and to do nothing rash.
For you brought these men, neither temple plunderers nor blaspheming our goddess.
So if indeed Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a matter against anyone, courts are conducted, and there are proconsuls; let them accuse one another.
But if you inquire anything beyond this, it will be solved in the lawful assembly.
And indeed, we are in danger of being accused of insurrection in regard to this day, there existing not one cause concerning which we will be able to give a reason for this commotion.”
And having said these things, he dismissed the assembly.
Now after the uproar had ceased, Paul, having summoned the disciples and having encouraged them and having said farewell, departed to go to Macedonia.
And having passed through those districts and having exhorted them with much talk, he came to Greece.
And having continued three months, a plot having been made against him by the Jews, he being about to sail into Syria, a purpose arose to return through Macedonia.
And he was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, and Aristarchus, and Secundus of the Thessalonians, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, and the Asians Tychicus and Trophimus.
But these, having gone ahead, waited for us in Troas.
And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of the Unleavened Bread, and within five days we came to them at Troas, where we stayed seven days.
And on the first day of the week, of us having come together to break bread, Paul, about to depart on the next day, talked to them and continued the talk until midnight.
Now there were many lamps in the upper room where we were assembled.
And a certain young man named Eutychus was sitting by the window, overpowered by deep sleep as Paul talked on longer. Having been overpowered by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
But Paul having descended, fell upon him, and having embraced him, he said, “Do not be alarmed, for his life is in him!”
And having gone up, and having broken the bread, and having eaten, and having talked at length until daybreak, so he departed.
Then they brought the boy alive, and were not just a little comforted.
But we, having gone ahead to the ship, sailed to Assos, being about to take in Paul there. For having arranged thus, he was readying himself to go on foot.
Now when he met with us at Assos, having taken him in, we came to Mitylene.
And having sailed away from there, on the following day we arrived opposite Chios, and the next day we arrived at Samos, and the following day we came to Miletus.
For Paul had decided to sail by Ephesus, so that it might not come upon him to spend time in Asia; for he was hastened, if it was possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
And from Miletus, having sent to Ephesus, he called for the elders of the church.
And when they had come to him, he said to them, “You know from the first day on which I arrived in Asia, how I was with you the whole time,
serving the Lord with all humility and tears, and trials having befallen me in the plots of the Jews;
how I did not shrink back from declaring to you anything being profitable, and teaching you publicly and from house to house,
earnestly testifying both to the Jewish and to Greeks repentance in God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
And now behold, bound in the Spirit I go to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me in it,
except that the Holy Spirit fully testifies to me in every city, saying that chains and tribulations await me.
But I make my life neither dear nor any account to myself, so as to finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus: to testify fully the gospel of the grace of God.
And now, behold, I know that all of you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom will see my face no more.
Therefore I testify to you in this day that I am innocent of the blood of all.
For I did not shrink back from proclaiming to you the whole counsel of God.
Take heed to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit has set you overseers, to shepherd the church of God, which He purchased with the own blood.
I know that after my departure, grievous wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock,
and out from your own selves, men will rise up, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them.
Therefore stay awake, remembering that three years night and day I never ceased admonishing each one with tears.
And now I commit you to God and to the word of His grace, being able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all those having been sanctified.
I coveted nobody’s silver or gold or clothing.
You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my needs and to those being with me.
In everything I showed you that by thus straining, it behooves us to aid those being weak, and also to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how He Himself said, ‘It is more Blessed to give than to receive.’”
And having said these things, having bowed his knee, he prayed with them all.
Then there was much weeping among all, and having fallen upon the neck of Paul, they were kissing him,
sorrowing especially over the word that he had spoken, that they are about to see his face no more. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
And it happened that after having drawn away from them, having run directly in our sailing, we came to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
And having found a boat passing over into Phoenicia, having gone on board, we set sail.
And having sighted Cyprus and having left it on the left, we kept sailing to Syria and landed at Tyre, for the ship was unloading the cargo there.
And we remained there seven days, having sought out the disciples, who kept telling Paul through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem.
And it happened that when we had completed the days, having set out, we journeyed, all accompanying us with wives and children as far as outside the city. And having bowed the knees on the shore, having prayed,
having said farewell to one another, we then went up into the boat, and they returned to the own.
And having completed the voyage from Tyre, we came down to Ptolemais, and having greeted the brothers, we stayed one day with them.
And having gone forth on the next day, we came to Caesarea, and having entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, being of the seven, we stayed with him.
And with this man there were four daughters, virgins prophesying.
And remaining many days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
And having come to us and having taken Paul’s belt, having bound his feet and hands, he said, “Thus the Holy Spirit says, ‘In this way the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man whose belt this is, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.’”
And when we had heard these things, both we and those of that place began begging him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Then Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I have readiness not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
And of him not being persuaded, we were silent, having said, “The will of the Lord be done.”
Now after these days, having packed the baggage, we started on our way up to Jerusalem.
And some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing a certain Mnason, a Cypriot, an early disciple with whom we would lodge.
Now of our having arrived at Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
And on the following day, Paul went in with us unto James, and all the elders arrived.
And having greeted them, he began to relate, one by each, the things God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
And those having heard began glorifying God, and they said to him, “You see, brother, how many myriads there are among the Jews having believed, and are all zealous ones for the Law.
Now they have been informed about you, that you teach all Jews among the Gentiles apostasy from Moses, telling them not to circumcise the children nor to walk in the customs.
What then is it? Certainly they will hear that you have come.
Therefore do this that we say to you. With us there are four men, having a vow on themselves.
Having taken these men, be purified with them and bear expense for them, so that they will shave the head, and all will know that of which they have been informed about you is nothing, but you yourself also walk orderly, keeping the Law.
Now concerning those of the Gentiles having believed, we wrote, having adjudged them to keep from both the things offered to idols, and blood, and what is strangled, and sexual immorality.”
Then Paul, having taken the men on the following day, having been purified with them, entered into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of the purification until the sacrifice was offered for each one of them.
Now when the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews from Asia, having seen him in the temple, began stirring up the whole crowd and laid the hands upon him,
crying out, “Men, Israelites, help! This is the man teaching all those everywhere against the people and the Law and this place. And besides, he has also brought Greeks into the temple and defiled this holy place.”
For it was they having previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him, whom they were supposing that Paul had brought into the temple.
And the whole city was provoked, and there was a rushing together of the people. And having laid hold of Paul, they dragged him outside the temple, and immediately the doors were shut.
And of them seeking to kill him, a report came to the commander of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in an uproar,
who at once, having taken with him soldiers and centurions, ran down upon them. And having seen the commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
Then having drawn near, the commander laid hold of him and commanded him to be bound with two chains, and began inquiring who he might be and what it is he has been doing.
They were crying out in the crowd one thing, but others another. And he being unable to know the facts on account of the uproar, ordered him to be brought into the barracks.
Now when he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd.
For the multitude of the people were following, crying out, “Away with him.”
And being about to be brought into the barracks, Paul says to the commander, “Is it permitted to me to say something to you?” Then he was saying, “Do you know Greek?
Are you not, then, the Egyptian, the one before these days having led a revolt and having led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the ‘Assassins?’”
But Paul said, “I am indeed a Jew, a man of Tarsus of Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. Now I implore you, allow me to speak to the people.”
And he having allowed him, Paul, having stood on the stairs, made a sign with the hand to the people. And great silence having taken place, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying:
“Men, brothers, and fathers, hear now my defense to you.”
And having heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they became even more quiet. And he says,
“I am a Jew, a man born in Tarsus of Cilicia and brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, having been instructed according to the exactness of the Law of our Fathers, being a zealous one of God, even as you all are this day,
who persecuted this Way as far as death, binding and betraying to prisons both men and women,
as also the high priest and the whole elderhood bears witness to me, from whom also having received letters to the brothers, I was on my way to Damascus to bring also those being there, bound to Jerusalem, in order that they might be punished.
But it happened to me, journeying and drawing near to Damascus about noon, that suddenly a great light out of heaven shone around me,
and I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?’
And I answered, ‘Who are You, Lord?’ And He said to me, ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.’
And those being with me indeed beheld the light, but they did not hear the voice of the One speaking to me.
Then I said, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ And the Lord said to me, ‘Having risen up, go to Damascus, and there it will be told you concerning all things that it has been appointed you to do.’
And while I could not see from the brightness of that light, I came to Damascus, being led by the hand by those being with me.
And a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the Law, borne witness to by all the Jews dwelling there,
having come to me and having stood by me, said to me, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight.’ And the same hour I looked up at him.
Then he said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know His will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear the voice out of His mouth.
For you will be a witness for Him to all men of what you have seen and heard.
And now why do you delay? Having arisen, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on His name.’
And it happened to me, having returned to Jerusalem and of my praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
and saw Him saying to me, ‘Make haste and go away with speed out of Jerusalem, because they will not receive your testimony about Me.’
And I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that in each of those synagogues I was imprisoning and beating those believing on You.
And when the blood of Your witness of Stephen was poured out, I myself also was standing by and consenting and watching over the garments of those killing him.’
And He said to me, ‘Go, for I will send you far away to the Gentiles.’”
Now they were listening to him until this word. Then they lifted up their voice, saying, “Away with such from the earth. For he is not fit to live!”
And they were crying out and casting off the garments and throwing dust into the air.
The commander ordered him to be brought into the barracks, having directed him to be examined by flogging, so that he might know for what cause they were crying out against him like this.
But as he stretched him forward with the straps, Paul said to the centurion standing by, “Is it lawful to you to flog a man who is a Roman and uncondemned?”
And the centurion having heard it, having gone to the commander, reported it saying, “What are you going to do? For this man is a Roman.”
And having come near, the commander said to him, “Tell me, are you a Roman?” And he was saying, “Yes.”
Then the commander answered, “I bought this citizenship with a great sum.” But Paul was saying, “But I even was born so.”
So immediately those being about to examine him departed from him, and the commander also was afraid, having ascertained that he is a Roman, and because he had bound him.
And on the next day, desiring to know for certain why he is accused by the Jews, he unbound him and commanded the chief priests and the whole council to assemble. And having brought down Paul, he set him among them.
And having looked intently at the Council, Paul said, “Men, brothers, I have lived as a citizen in all good conscience to God unto this day.”
Then the high priest Ananias commanded those standing by him to strike his mouth.
Then Paul said to him, “God is about to strike you, whitewashed wall! And you, do you sit judging me according to the Law, and, violating law, command me to be struck?”
Now those who stood by said, “Do you insult the high priest of God?”
And Paul was saying, “I was not aware, brothers, that he is high priest; for it has been written: ‘You shall not speak evil of the ruler of your people.’”
Then Paul, having known that the one part consists of Sadducees, but the other of Pharisees, began crying out in the Council, “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee; I am judged concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead.”
And of him saying this, a dissension arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the crowd was divided.
For indeed Sadducees say there to be no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but Pharisees confess both.
Then a great clamor arose, and some of the scribes of the party of the Pharisees, having risen up, were contending saying, “We find nothing evil in this man. And what if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?”
And great dissension arising, the commander, having feared lest Paul should be torn to pieces by them, commanded the troop, having gone down, to take him by force from their midst and to bring him into the barracks.
But the following night the Lord, having stood by him, said, “Take courage, for as you have fully testified about Me at Jerusalem, so also it behooves you to testify in Rome.”
Then when it was day, the Jews having made a conspiracy, put themselves under an oath, declaring neither to eat nor to drink until they should kill Paul.
Now there were more than forty having made this conspiracy,
who, having come to the chief priests and the elders, said, “We have bound ourselves with an oath to eat nothing until we should kill Paul.
Now therefore you with the Council make a report to the commander, so that he might bring him down to you, as being about to examine more earnestly the things about him. And we are ready to kill him before his drawing near.”
But the son of Paul’s sister, having heard of the ambush, having come near and having entered into the barracks, reported it to Paul.
Then Paul, having summoned one of the centurions, was saying, “Take this young man to the commander, for he has something to report to him.”
So indeed the one having taken him brought him to the commander, and he says, “Paul the prisoner, having called to me, asked me to lead this young man to you, having something to say to you.”
Then the commander, having taken hold of his hand and having withdrawn in private, began to inquire, “What is it that you have to report to me?”
And he said, “The Jews have agreed to ask you that you might bring down Paul into the Council tomorrow, as being about to inquire something more earnestly about him.
You therefore should not be persuaded by them. For more than forty of their men lie in wait for him, who have put themselves under an oath neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him; and now they are ready, awaiting the promise from you.”
So indeed the commander dismissed the young man, having instructed him, “Tell no one that you have reported these things to me.”
And having summoned certain two of the centurions, he said, “Prepare for the third hour of the night two hundred soldiers and seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, so that they might go as far as Caesarea,
and provide mounts, so that having set Paul upon them, they might bring him safely to Felix the governor,”
having written a letter having this form:
“Claudius Lysias, To the most excellent, governor Felix: Greetings.
This man having been seized by the Jews and being about to be killed by them, having come up with the troop, I rescued him, having learned that he is a Roman.
And resolving to know the charge on account of which they were accusing him, I brought him down to their council,
whom I found being accused concerning questions of their Law, but having no accusation worthy of death or of chains.
And it having been disclosed to me of a plot that would be against the man, I sent him to you at once, also having instructed the accusers to speak these things against him before you.”
Therefore indeed the soldiers, according to that having been ordered them, having taken Paul, brought him to Antipatris by night.
And on the next day, having allowed the horsemen to go with him, they returned to the barracks,
who having entered into Caesarea and having delivered the letter to the governor, also presented Paul to him.
And having read it and having asked what province he is from, and having learned that he is from Cilicia,
he was saying “I will hear you fully when your accusers may have arrived also,” having commanded him to be guarded in the Praetorium of Herod.
And after five days, the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and a certain orator, Tertullus, who made a representation against Paul to the governor.
And of him having been called, Tertullus began to accuse, saying, “We are attaining great peace through you, and excellent measures are being done to this nation through your foresight.
Both in every way and everywhere, we gladly accept it, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.
But in order that I should not be a hindrance you to any longer, I implore you to hear us briefly, in your kindness.
For we are having found this man a pest, and stirring insurrection among all the Jews in the world, and a leader of the sect of the Nazarenes
who even attempted to profane the temple, whom also we seized.

Having examined him yourself, you will be able to know from him concerning all these things of which we accuse him.”
And the Jews also agreed, declaring these things to be so.
And the governor having made a sign to him to speak, Paul answered: “Knowing you as being judge to this nation for many years, I make a defense cheerfully to the things concerning myself.
You are able to know that there are to me not more than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
And neither did they find me reasoning with anyone or making a tumultuous gathering of a crowd in the temple, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city.
Nor are they able to prove to you concerning the things of which now they accuse me.
But I confess this to you, that according to the Way which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers, believing all things throughout the Law and that have been written in the Prophets,
having a hope in God, which they themselves also await, that there is about to be a resurrection, both of the just and of the unjust.
In this also I myself strive to have a conscience without offense toward God and men through everything.
Now after many years, I arrived to bring alms to my nation, and offerings,
during which they found me purified in the temple, not with a crowd nor in tumult. But there are some Jews from Asia
who ought to appear before you and to make accusation if they may have anything against me.
Otherwise, let them say themselves any unrighteousness they found in me, having stood before the Council,
other than concerning this one voice, which I cried out standing among them: ‘I am judged by you this day concerning the resurrection of the dead.’”
But Felix, more precisely having knowledge of the things concerning the Way, put them off, having said, “When Lysias the commander might have come down, I will examine the things as to you,”
having commanded the centurion to keep him and to let him have ease and not to forbid his own to minister to him.
Then after some days, Felix, having arrived with the own wife Drusilla, being a Jewess, sent for Paul and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.
And of him reasoning concerning righteousness and self-control and the coming judgment, Felix, having become frightened, answered, “Go away for the present, and having found opportunity, I will call for you.”
At the same time also he is hoping that riches will be given him by Paul. So also sending for him often, he was talking with him.
But two years having been completed, Felix received Porcius Festus as successor, and wishing to acquire for himself favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul imprisoned.
Therefore Festus, having arrived in the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
And the chief priests and the chiefs of the Jews made a presentation before him against Paul, and they were begging him,
asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem, forming an ambush to kill him on the way.
So indeed Festus answered that Paul is to be kept in Caesarea, and he himself is about to set out in quickness.
He says, “Therefore those among you in power, having gone down together, if there is anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him.”
And having spent with them not more than eight or ten days, having gone down to Caesarea, on the next day having sat on the judgment seat, he commanded Paul to be brought.
And he having arrived, the Jews having come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many and weighty charges, which they were not able to prove.
Paul made his defense: “Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned in anything.”
But Festus, wishing to lay a favor on the Jews, answering, said to Paul, “Are you willing, having gone up to Jerusalem, to be judged before me there concerning these things?”
And Paul said, “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where it behooves me to be judged. I have done nothing wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well.
Therefore if indeed I do wrong and have done anything worthy of death, I do not refuse to die. But if there is nothing of which they can accuse me, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!”
Then Festus, having conferred with the Council, answered, “You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you will go!”
Now some days having passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice came down to Caesarea, greeting Festus.
And as they stayed there many days, Festus laid before the king the things relating to Paul, saying, “There is a certain man left by Felix as a prisoner,
concerning whom, on my having been in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews made a presentation, asking judgment against him,
to whom I answered that it is not the custom with Romans to give up any man before that the one being accused may have it to face the accusers, and he may have the opportunity of defense concerning the accusation.
Therefore of them having come together here, having made no delay, the next day having sat on the judgment seat, I commanded the man to be brought,
concerning whom the accusers, having stood up, were bringing no charge of the crimes of which I was expecting.
But they had certain questions against him concerning their own religion and concerning a certain Jesus having been dead, whom Paul was affirming to be alive.
Now I, being perplexed concerning this inquiry, was asking if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there to be judged concerning these things.
But of Paul having appealed for himself to be kept for the decision of the Emperor, I commanded him to be kept until that I might send him to Caesar.”
Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I have been wanting also to hear the man myself.” He says, “Tomorrow you will hear him.”
So on the next day Agrippa and Bernice, having come with great pomp and having entered into the audience hall with both the commanders and the men in prominence in the city, and Festus having commanded, Paul was brought in.
And Festus says, “King Agrippa and all men being present with us, you see this one concerning whom the whole multitude of the Jews pleaded with me, both in Jerusalem and here, crying out of him that he ought not to live any longer.
But I, having understood him to have done nothing worthy of death, of this one himself now having appealed to the Emperor, I determined to send him,
concerning whom I have nothing definite to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that of the examination having taken place, I might have something to write.
For it seems absurd to me, sending a prisoner, not also to specify the charges against him.”
And Agrippa was saying to Paul, “It is permitted you to speak for yourself.” Then Paul, having stretched out the hand, began his defense:
“Concerning all of which I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa, I esteem myself fortunate before you, being about to defend myself today,
you being especially acquainted with all the customs and also controversies of the Jews. Therefore I implore you to hear me patiently.
Then indeed all the Jews know my manner of life which is from youth, having been from its beginning among my own nation and in Jerusalem,
knowing me from the first, if they would be willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our religion I lived as a Pharisee.
And now I stand being judged for the hope of the promise having been made by God to our fathers,
to which our twelve tribes hope to attain, serving in earnestness night and day, the hope concerning which I am accused by the Jews, O king.
Why is it judged incredible by you if God raises the dead?
Therefore I indeed in myself thought I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
which also I did in Jerusalem. And I also locked up many of the saints in prisons, having received the authority from the chief priests; and they being put to death, I cast against them a vote.
And in all the synagogues, punishing them often, I was compelling them to blaspheme. And being exceedingly furious against them, I kept persecuting them even as far as to foreign cities,
during which, journeying to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests,
at midday on the road, O king, I saw, a light from heaven above, the brightness of the sun, having shone around me and those journeying with me.
And of all of us having fallen down to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’
Then I said, ‘Who are You, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But rise up and stand on your feet. For I have appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you a servant and a witness both of that which you have seen of Me, and of the things in which I will appear to you,
delivering you out from the people and from the Gentiles to whom I am sending you,
to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those having been sanctified by faith in Me.’
So then, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but both first to those in Damascus and Jerusalem, and all the region of Judea, and to the Gentiles, I kept declaring to repent and to turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
On account of these things the Jews, having seized me being in the temple, were attempting to kill me.
Therefore having obtained help from God unto this day, I have stood bearing witness both to small and to great, saying nothing other than what both the prophets and Moses said was about to happen:
that Christ would suffer. As first through resurrection from the dead, He is about to preach light both to our people and to the Gentiles.”
Now of him saying these things in his defense, Festus said in a loud voice, “You are insane, Paul! The great learning turns you to insanity!”
But Paul says, “I am not insane, most excellent Festus, but I speak words of truth and sobriety.
For the king understands concerning these things, to whom also I speak using boldness. For I am persuaded none of these things are hidden from him, for none of these things is done in a corner.
Do you believe the prophets, King Agrippa? I know that you believe.”
Then Agrippa said to Paul, “Within so little time do you persuade me to become a Christian?”
Then Paul said, “I would wish anyhow to God, both in a little and in much, not only you but also all those hearing me this day to become such as I also am, except these chains.”
Then the king and the governor rose up, and Bernice and those sitting with them,
and having withdrawn, they began speaking to one another, saying, “This man is doing nothing worthy of death or of chains.”
Then Agrippa was saying to Festus, “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
Now when our sailing to Italy was determined, they delivered both Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the cohort of Augustus.
And having boarded a ship of Adramyttium being about to sail to the places along Asia, we set sail—Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And the next day we landed at Sidon. And Julius, having treated Paul considerately, allowed him, having gone to his friends, to receive care.
And having set sail from there, we sailed under Cyprus because of the winds being contrary.
And having sailed across the sea and along Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra of Lycia.
And there the centurion, having found a ship of Alexandria sailing to Italy, placed us into it.
Now sailing slowly for many days, and with difficulty having arrived off Cnidus, the wind not permitting us, we sailed under Crete, off Salmone.
And coasting along it with difficulty, we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near to which was the city of Lasea.
Now much time having passed, and the voyage being already dangerous because of even the Fast already being over, Paul was admonishing them,
saying to them, “Men, I understand that the voyage is about to be filled with disaster and much loss, not only of the cargo and of the ship, but also of our lives.”
But the centurion was persuaded by the pilot and the ship owner, rather than by the things spoken by Paul.
And the harbor being unsuitable to winter in, the majority reached a decision to set sail from there, if somehow they might be able, having arrived at Phoenix—a harbor of Crete looking toward the southwest and toward the northwest—to winter there.
Now a south wind having blown gently, having thought to have obtained the purpose, having weighed anchor, they began coasting along very near Crete.
But not long after, there came down from it a tempestuous wind called the Northeaster.
And the ship having been caught and not being able to face to the wind, having given way, we were driven along.
And having run under a certain island called Cauda, we were able with difficulty to gain control of the lifeboat,
which having taken up, they began using supports, undergirding the ship. And fearing lest they should fall into the sandbars of Syrtis, having lowered the gear, thus they were driven along.
And we being storm-tossed violently, on the next day they began to make a jettison of cargo,
and on the third day they cast away the tackle of the ship with the own hands.
And neither sun nor stars appearing for many days, and no small tempest lying on us, from then on all hope of our being saved was abandoned.
There being also much time without food, at that time having stood up in their midst, Paul said, “It behooved you indeed, O men, having been obedient to me, not to have set sail from Crete and to have incurred this disaster and loss.
And yet now I exhort you to take heart, for there will be no loss of life from among you, only of the ship.
For this night an angel of God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me,
saying, ‘Fear not, Paul. It behooves you to stand before Caesar. And behold, God has granted to you all those sailing with you.’
Therefore take heart, men, for I believe God that it will be thus, according to the way it has been said to me.
But it behooves us to fall upon a certain island.”
And when the fourteenth night had come, of us being driven about in the Adriatic, toward the middle of the night the sailors began sensing some land to be drawing near to them.
And having taken soundings, they found twenty fathoms. Then having gone a little farther and having taken soundings again, they found fifteen fathoms.
And fearing lest we might fall somewhere on rocky places, having cast four anchors out of the stern, they were praying for day to come.
And of the sailors seeking to flee out of the ship and having let down the lifeboat into the sea under pretense as being about to cast out anchors from the bow,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, “Unless these remain in the ship, you are not able to be saved.”
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the lifeboat, and allowed her to fall away.
And until that day was about to come, Paul kept urging all to partake of food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day you continue watching without eating, having taken nothing.
Therefore I exhort you to take food, for this is for your preservation; for not one hair of your head will perish.”
Now having said these things and having taken bread, he gave thanks to God before all; and having broken it, he began to eat.
And all, having been encouraged, also took food themselves.
And we were altogether two hundred seventy-six souls in the ship.
Then having been filled with food, they began to lighten the ship, casting out the wheat into the sea.
And when it was day, they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay, having a shore on which they determined to drive the ship if they should be able.
And having cut away the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time having loosened the ropes of the rudders. And having hoisted the foresail to the blowing wind, they began making for the shore.
But having fallen into a place between two seas, they ran the vessel aground. And indeed the bow, having stuck fast, remained immovable, and the stern was being broken up by the violence of the waves.
Now the plan of the soldiers was that they should kill the prisoners, lest anyone, having swum away, should escape.
But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, hindered them of the purpose; and he commanded those being able to swim, having cast themselves off first, to go out on the land,
and the rest, some indeed on boards, and some on things from the ship. And thus it came to pass that all were brought safely to the land.
And having been saved, we then found out that the island is called Malta.
And the natives were showing not just the ordinary kindness to us. For having kindled a fire, they received all of us, because of the rain coming on and because of the cold.
Now of Paul having gathered a quantity of sticks and having laid them on the fire, a viper, having come out from the heat, fastened on his hand.
And when the natives saw the beast hanging from his hand, they began to say to one another, “By all means this man is a murderer whom, having been saved from the sea, Justice has not permitted to live.”
Then indeed, having shaken off the creature into the fire, he suffered no injury.
But they were expecting him to be about to become inflamed or suddenly to fall down dead. But of them waiting a great while and seeing nothing amiss happening to him, having changed their opinion, they began declaring him to be a god.
Now in the parts around that place were lands belonging to the chief of the island, named Publius, who having received us, entertained us hospitably for three days.
And it came to pass, the father of Publius was lying, oppressed with fevers and dysentery, toward whom Paul, having entered and having prayed, having laid the hands on him, healed him.
And of this having taken place, also the rest in the island having infirmities were coming and were healed,
who also honored us with many honors, and on setting sail, they laid on us the things for our needs.
Then after three months, we sailed in an Alexandrian ship having wintered in the island, with a figurehead of the Dioscuri.
And having put in at Syracuse, we stayed three days,
from where having gone around, we arrived at Rhegium. And after one day a south wind having come on, on the second day we came to Puteoli,
where having found some brothers, we were entreated to remain with them seven days. And so we came to Rome.
And the brothers from there, having heard the things concerning us, came out as far as the market of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us, whom Paul having seen, having given thanks to God, took courage.
Now when we came to Rome, Paul was allowed to stay by himself, with the soldier who was guarding him.
And it came to pass after three days, he called together those being leaders of the Jews. And of them having come together, he was saying to them, “Men, brothers, having done nothing against the people or the customs of our fathers, I was delivered from Jerusalem a prisoner into the hands of the Romans,
who having examined me, were wanting to let me go, on account of not one cause of death existing in me.
But of the Jews objecting, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, not as having anything to lay against my nation.
Therefore for this cause I have called to see you and to speak to you. For because of the hope of Israel, I have around me this chain.”
Then they said to him, “We received neither letters concerning you from Judea, nor any of the brothers having arrived reported or said anything evil concerning you.
But we deem it worthy to hear from you what you think, for truly concerning this sect, it is known to us that it is spoken against everywhere.”
Then having appointed him a day, many came to him to the lodging, to whom he expounded from morning to evening, fully testifying to the kingdom of God and persuading them concerning Jesus from both the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
And indeed, some were persuaded of the things he is speaking, but some refused to believe.
And being discordant with one another they began to leave, Paul having spoken one word: “The Holy Spirit spoke rightly by the prophet Isaiah to your fathers,
saying: ‘Go to this people and say, “In hearing you will hear and never understand; and in seeing you will see and never perceive.”
For the heart of this people has grown dull, and with the ears they barely hear, and they have closed their eyes, lest ever they should see with the eyes, and they should hear with the ears, and they should understand with the heart, and should turn, and I will heal them.’
Therefore be it known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles, and they will listen!”

And he stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and was welcoming all coming unto him,
proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, unhinderedly.
Paul, servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle having been set apart for the gospel of God,
which He promised beforehand through His prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
concerning His Son, having come of the seed of David according to flesh,
having been declared the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection from the dead: Jesus Christ our Lord,
through whom we have received grace and apostleship unto obedience of faith among all the Gentiles on behalf of His name,
among whom are you also, called of Jesus Christ.
To all those being in Rome beloved of God, called saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First indeed, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being proclaimed in all the world.
For God, whom I serve in my spirit in the gospel of His Son, is my witness how unceasingly I make mention of you,
always upon my prayers imploring, if perhaps now at last by the will of God I will make a prosperous journey to come to you.
For I long to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you, to your strengthening,
and, that is, to be encouraged together among you through the faith among one another, both of you and of me.
Now I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that many times I purposed to come to you, and was hindered until the present, that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among the other Gentiles.
I am a debtor both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and the foolish.
Thus as to me there is readiness to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God unto salvation to everyone believing—both to Jewish first, and to Greek.
For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as it has been written: “And the righteous will live by faith.”
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven upon all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, suppressing the truth by unrighteousness,
because the known of God is manifest among them, for God has revealed it to them.
For from the creation of the world His invisible qualities, both His eternal power and divinity, are clearly seen, being understood by the things made, for them to be without excuse.
For having known God, they glorified Him not as God, or were thankful; but they became futile in their thinking and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing to be wise, they became fools,
and they changed the glory of the immortal God into a likeness of an image of mortal man and birds and quadrupeds and creeping things.
Therefore God gave them up in the desires of their hearts to impurity to dishonor their bodies between themselves,
who changed the truth of God into falsehood, and reverenced and served the created thing beyond the One having created it, who is blessed to the ages! Amen.
Because of this, God gave up them to passions of dishonor. For even their females changed the natural use into that contrary to nature.
And likewise also the males, having left the natural use of the female, were inflamed in their desire toward one another, males with males, working out shame and receiving in themselves the recompense which was fitting of their error.
And as they did not see fit to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a depraved mind, to do things not being proper;
being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, maliciousness; gossips,
slanderers, hateful to God, insolent, arrogant, boastful; inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents;
foolish, untrustworthy, heartless, unmerciful;
who having known the righteous judgment of God, that those doing such things are worthy of death, not only are practicing them, but are also approving of those practicing them.
Therefore you are inexcusable, O man, each one who is judging. For in that which you judge the other, you are condemning yourself, for you, the one judging, do the same things.
But we know that the judgment of God upon those practicing such things is according to truth.
Now do you suppose this, O man, the one judging those practicing such things and doing them yourself, that you will escape the judgment of God?
Or do you despise the riches of His kindness and forbearance and patience, not knowing that the kindness of God leads you to repentance?
But because of your hardness and unrepentant heart, you are treasuring up to yourself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgement of God,
who “will give to each according to his works,”
to those who indeed with endurance in good work are seeking glory and honor and immortality, eternal life;
but to those of self-interest and disobeying the truth, but being persuaded about unrighteousness, wrath and anger;
tribulation and distress upon every soul of man working evil, both of Jewish first, and also of Greek;
but glory and honor and peace to everyone doing good, both to Jewish first, and to Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For as many as have sinned without the Law also will perish without the Law; and as many as have sinned in the Law will be judged by the Law,
for not the hearers of the Law are righteous with God; but the doers of the Law will be justified.
For when Gentiles, not having the Law, do by nature the things of the Law, these not having the Law are a law to themselves,
who show the work of the Law, written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and the thoughts between one another accusing or also defending them
on that day when God will judge the secrets of men according to my gospel, by Christ Jesus.
But if you are called a Jew and rely on the Law and boast in God,
and you know His will and approve the things being superior, being instructed out of the Law,
and you are persuaded that you yourself are a guide of the blind, a light to those in darkness,
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of infants, having in the Law the embodiment of knowledge and of the truth—
then you teaching another, do you do not teach yourself? You preaching not to steal, do you steal?
You saying not to commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You abhorring idols, do you rob temples?
You who boast in Law, do you dishonor God through the transgression of the Law?
As it has been written: “For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.”
For circumcision profits if you do the Law; but if you are a transgressor of Law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
Therefore if the uncircumcision keeps the requirements of the Law, will not his uncircumcision be reckoned for circumcision?
And the uncircumcision by nature, fulfilling the Law, will judge you who with the letter and circumcision are a transgressor of Law.
For the one on the outside a Jew is not, neither that on the outside in flesh is circumcision.
But he who is a Jew is one on the inside; and circumcision is of heart, in spirit, not in letter, of whom the praise is not of men, but of God.
What then is the superiority of the Jew? Or what is the benefit of the circumcision?
Much in every way. For chiefly indeed, that they were entrusted with the oracles of God.
What if indeed some disbelieved? Will their unbelief nullify the faithfulness of God?
Never may it be! But let God be true, and every man a liar, as it has been written: “That You may be justified in Your words, and will prevail in Your being judged.”
But if our unrighteousness shows God’s righteousness, what shall we say? God, inflicting the wrath, is unrighteous? I speak according to man.
Never may it be! Otherwise, how will God judge the world?
But if in my lie, the truth of God abounded to His glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?
And is it not, as we are slanderously charged, and as some affirm us to say, “Let us do evil things that good things may come?” Their condemnation is just.
What then? Are we better? Not at all. For we have already charged both Jews and Greeks all to be under sin.
As it has been written: “There is none righteous, not even one;
there is none understanding; there is none seeking after God.
All have turned away; together they have become worthless; there is none who is practicing good, there is not so much as one.
Their throat is a grave having been opened; they keep practicing deceit with their tongues; the venom of vipers is under their lips,
of whom the mouth is full of cursing and of bitterness;
their feet are swift to shed blood;
ruin and misery are in their paths;
and the way of peace they have not known.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
Now we know that whatever the Law says, it speaks to those under the Law, so that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world may be under judgment to God.
Therefore by works of the Law, not any flesh will be justified before Him; for through the Law is knowledge of sin.
But now apart from Law, the righteousness of God has been revealed, being borne witness to by the Law and the Prophets.
And the righteousness of God is through faith from Jesus Christ toward all those believing. For there is no distinction,
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God set forth as a propitiation through faith in His blood, for a showing forth of His righteousness, because of the forbearance of the sins having taken place beforehand,
in the forbearance of God, for the showing forth of His righteousness in the present time, for Him to be just, and justifying the one of the faith of Jesus.
Where then is boasting? It has been excluded. Through what principle? That of works? No, but through the principle of faith.
Therefore we reckon a man to be justified by faith apart from works of the Law.
Or is He the God of Jews only, not also of Gentiles? Yes, also of Gentiles,
since indeed God is the One who will justify the circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision through the same faith.
Do we, then, nullify the Law through faith? Never may it be! Instead, we uphold Law.
What then shall we say Abraham our father discovered according to the flesh?
For if Abraham was justified by works, he has ground of boasting, but not toward God.
For what does the Scripture say? “And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness.”
Now to the one working, the reward is not reckoned according to grace, but according to debt.
However, to the one not working, but believing on the One justifying the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness,
just as David also declares the blessedness of the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:
“Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;
blessed is the man against whom the Lord will never reckon sin.”
Is this blessing then on the circumcision, or also on the uncircumcision? For we are saying faith was credited to Abraham as righteousness.
How then was it credited? Being in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith that he had while in the uncircumcision, for him to be father of all those believing while in uncircumcision, for the righteousness to be credited also to them,
and the father of circumcision to those not only of circumcision, but also to those walking in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham during uncircumcision.
For the promise was to Abraham or his descendants that he should be heir of the world, not through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith.
For if those of the Law are heirs, faith has been made void and the promise made of no effect.
For Law brings wrath; and where there is no Law, neither is transgression.
Therefore it is of faith, that it may be according to grace, for the promise to be sure to all the seed, not only to that of the Law, but also to that of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us of all—
as it has been written: “I have made you a father of many nations.”—before God whom he believed, the One giving life to the dead and calling into being the things not even existing,
who against hope, in hope believed, for him to become the father of many nations, according to that having been spoken, “So shall your offspring be.”
And not having become weak in the faith, he considered his body already having become dead, being about a hundred years old, and the lifelessness of Sarah’s womb.
Yet he did not waver through unbelief at the promise of God, but was strengthened in faith, having given glory to God,
and having been fully assured that what He had promised, He is also able to do.
Therefore also “it was credited to him unto righteousness.”
Now it was not written on account of him alone that “it was credited to him,”
but also on account of us, to whom it is about to be credited, to those believing on the One having raised Jesus our Lord out from the dead,
who was delivered over for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification.
Therefore, having been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom also we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand; and we boast in the hope of the glory of God.
And not only so, but also we glory in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces perseverance;
and perseverance, character; and character, hope.
And hope does not make us ashamed, because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, the One having been given to us.
Yet indeed Christ, of us still being without strength, according to the right time, died for the ungodly.
For rarely will anyone die for a righteous man, though on behalf of the good man perhaps someone would even dare to die.
But God demonstrates His love to us, that of us being still sinners, Christ died for us.
Therefore much more, having been justified now by His blood, we will be saved by Him from wrath!
For if, being enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved in His life!
And not only so, but also we are rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
Because of this, just as sin entered into the world through one man, and death through sin, so also death passed to all men, because all sinned.
For until the Law, sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed, there being no law.
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those not having sinned in the likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a type of the coming One.
But so also the gift is not like the trespass. For if by the trespass of the one, the many died, how much more did the grace of God and the gift in grace, which is of the one man Jesus Christ, abound to the many!
And the gift is not as through one having sinned. For truly the judgment from one was unto condemnation; but the gift is out of many trespasses unto justification.
For if, by the trespass of the one, death reigned through the one, how much more will those receiving the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ!
So then, just as through one trespass, it is unto condemnation to all men, so also through one act of righteousness it is unto justification of life to all men.
For as indeed through the disobedience of the one man, the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the One, the many will be made righteous.
Now the Law entered so that trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace overabounded,
so that, just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness, unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What then will we say? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?
Never may it be! How shall we who died to sin still live in it?
Or are you unaware that as many as have been baptized into Christ Jesus have been baptized into His death?
Therefore we were buried with Him through baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised up out from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life.
For if we have become united in the likeness of His death, certainly also we will be of the resurrection,
knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him, so that the body of sin might be annulled, that we are no longer enslaved to sin.
For the one having died has been freed from sin.
Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with Him,
knowing that Christ, having been raised up out from the dead, dies no more. Death no longer rules over Him.
For that which He died, He died to sin once for all; but that which He lives, He lives to God.
So also you, consider yourselves to be dead indeed to sin, but living to God in Christ Jesus.
Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body, in order to obey its desires.
Neither yield your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but yield yourselves to God, as living out from the dead, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness.
For sin will not rule over you, for you are not under law, but under grace.
What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law, but under grace? Never may it be!
Do you not know that to whom you yield yourselves as slaves for obedience, you are slaves to him whom you obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?
But thanks be to God that you who were slaves of sin have now become obedient from the heart to the pattern of teaching to which you were committed.
And having been set free from sin, you have become slaves to righteousness.
I speak in human terms on account of the weakness of your flesh. For just as you yielded your members in bondage to impurity and to lawlessness unto lawlessness, so now yield your members in bondage to righteousness unto sanctification.
For when you were slaves of sin, you were free from righteousness.
What fruit, therefore, did you have then in the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now, having been set free from sin, and having become slaves to God, you have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end is eternal life.
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Or are you ignorant brothers (for I speak to those knowing the law), that the law rules over the man for as long as the time he is alive?
For the married woman is bound by law to the living husband; but if the husband should die, she is cleared from the law of the husband.
So then, if she is to another man, the husband being alive, she will be called an adulteress; but if the husband should die, she is free from the law, so as for her not to be an adulteress, having been to another man.
Likewise, my brothers, you also have been put to death to the Law through the body of Christ, for you to belong to another, to the One having been raised out from the dead, so that we should bear fruit to God.
For while we were in the flesh, the passions of sins that were through the Law were at work in our members, to the bringing forth of fruit to death.
But now we have been released from the Law, having died to that which we were bound, in order for us to serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.
What then shall we say? Is the Law sin? Never may it be! But I have not known sin, if not by Law. And indeed, I had not been conscious of covetousness if the Law had not said, “You shall not covet.”
But sin, having taken an occasion by the commandment, produced in me all covetousness; for apart from the Law, sin is dead.
And I once was alive apart from Law; but the commandment having come, sin revived, and I died;
and this commandment that was unto life proved to be death to me.
For sin, having taken an occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it put me to death.
So indeed, the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Has that which is good then become death to me? Never may it be! But in order that sin might be shown to be sin, it is working out death through that which is good to me, so that through the commandment sin might become sinful beyond excess.
For we know that the Law is spiritual; but I am fleshly, having been sold under sin.
For what I do, I do not understand. For what I want, this I do not do; but what I hate, this I do.
Now if that which I do not want, this I do, I consent to the Law, that it is good.
And in that case I am no longer doing it, but the sin dwelling in me.
For I know that there dwells in me nothing good, that is, in my flesh. For to will is present with me, but not to do good.
For the good that I desire, I do not do; but the evil that I do not want, this I practice.
Now if what I do not want, I do this, it is no longer I who do it, but sin dwelling in me.
So I find the principle in my desiring to do good, that evil is present with me.
For I delight in the Law of God according to the inward man;
but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and making me captive to the law of sin being in my members.
O wretched man I am! Who will deliver me out of this body of death?
Thanks be then to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself indeed with my mind serve God’s Law; but with the flesh, the Law of sin.
Therefore there is now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus.
For the Law of the Spirit of life has set you free in Christ Jesus from the Law of sin and death.
For of the Law being powerless in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent His Son in likeness of sin of flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
so that the righteousness of the Law should be fulfilled in us not walking according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
For those being according to flesh mind the things of the flesh; but those according to Spirit, the things of the Spirit.
For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit, life and peace,
because the mind of the flesh is hostility toward God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, for not even can it be.
And those being in the flesh are not able to please God.
Now you are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you; but if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he is not of Him.
But if Christ is in you, the body is indeed dead on account of sin, but the Spirit is life on account of righteousness.
And if the Spirit of the One having raised up Jesus out from the dead dwells in you, the One having raised up Christ Jesus out from the dead also will give life to your mortal bodies, on account of His Spirit dwelling in you.
So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to flesh.
For if you live according to flesh, you are about to die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
For you have not received a spirit of bondage again to fear, but you have received the Spirit of divine adoption as sons, by whom we cry, “Abba! Father!”
The Spirit Himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God,
and if children, also heirs: heirs indeed of God, and joint-heirs of Christ, if indeed we suffer with Him, so that we may also be glorified together.
For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time are not comparable to the coming glory to be revealed to us.
For the earnest expectation of the creation awaits the revelation of the sons of God.
For the creation was subjected to futility, not willingly, but because of the One having subjected it, in hope
that the creation itself will also be set free from the bondage of decay, into the freedom of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that the whole creation groans together and travails together until now.
And not only so, but we ourselves, even having the firstfruit of the Spirit, also groan ourselves in ourselves, awaiting divine adoption as sons, the redemption of our body.
For in this hope we were saved; but hope being seen is no hope; for does anyone hope for what he sees?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we await in patience.
Now likewise also, the Spirit joins to help us in weakness; for we do not know the things which we should pray for as it behooves, but the Spirit Himself makes intercession with inexpressible groanings.
And the One searching hearts knows what is the mindset of the Spirit, because He intercedes for the saints according to God.
And we know that God works together all things for good to those loving God, to those being called according to His purpose,
because those whom He foreknew, He also predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son, for Him to be firstborn among many brothers.
And those whom He predestined, these also He called; and whom He called, these also He justified; and whom He justified, these also He glorified.
What then will we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
For He who spared not the own Son, but gave Him up for us all, how will He not also, with Him, grant us all things?
Who will bring an accusation against the elect of God? God is the One justifying.
Who is the one condemning? For it is Christ Jesus, the one having died, now rather having been raised up, who is also at the right hand of God, and who is interceding for us.
Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?
As it has been written: “For Your sake we face death all the day; we were regarded as sheep of slaughter.”
But in all these things, we more than conquer through the One having loved us.
For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
I speak the truth in Christ. I am not lying. My conscience testifies for me in the Holy Spirit
that my grief is great, and unceasing sorrow is in my heart.
For I could wish myself to be a curse, separated from Christ for my brothers, my kinsmen according to the flesh,
who are Israelites, whose is the divine adoption as sons, and the glory, and the covenants, and the lawgiving, and the service, and the promises;
whose are the patriarchs; and from whom is Christ according to the flesh, being God over all, blessed to the ages. Amen.
And it is not as that the word of God has failed. For not all who are of Israel, are these Israel.
Nor because they are seed of Abraham are all children. Rather, “In Isaac your offspring will be named.”
That is, the children of the flesh, these are not children of God; but the children of the promise are regarded as offspring.
For this is the word of the promise: “At this time I will come, and to Sarah there will be a son.”
And not only so, but also Rebecca, having conception by one, Isaac our father,
for they not yet having been born nor having done anything good or evil, so that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
not of works, but of the One calling, it was said to her, “The older will serve the younger.”
As it has been written: “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
What then shall we say? Is there injustice with God? Never may it be!
For He says to Moses: “I will show mercy to whom I may show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I may have compassion.”
So then, it is not of the willing, nor of the running, but of God showing mercy.
For the Scripture says to Pharaoh: “For this very purpose I have raised you up, so that I might show My power in you, and that My name should be declared in all the earth.”
So then, He shows mercy to whom He wants, and He hardens whom He wants.
Then you will say to me, “Why then does He still find fault? For who is resisting His purpose?”
But rather, O man, who are you, answering against God? Shall the thing formed say to the One having formed it, “Why have you made me like this?”
Or does the potter not have authority over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel unto honor, but one unto dishonor?
And what if God, desiring to show the wrath and to make known His power, bore with much patience the vessels of wrath, having been fitted for destruction,
that He might also make known the riches of His glory upon the vessels of mercy, which He prepared beforehand for glory,
even us, whom He has called not only out from the Jews, but also out from the Gentiles?
As He also says in Hosea: “I will call that which is not My people, My people; and her not having been loved, having been loved,”
and, “It will happen that in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not My people,’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Though the number of the sons of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
For the Lord will perform the sentence He is concluding and bringing swiftly upon the earth.”
And, as Isaiah foretold: “If the Lord of Hosts had not left us descendants, we would have become like Sodom, and we would have been made like Gomorrah.”
What then will we say? That Gentiles, not pursuing righteousness, have attained righteousness, and righteousness that is by faith;
but Israel, pursuing a law of righteousness, did not attain to that law.
Why? Because it was not by faith, but as by works. They stumbled over the stone of stumbling,
as it has been written: “Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense; and the one believing on Him will never be put to shame.”
Brothers, indeed the desire and supplication of my heart to God on behalf of them is for salvation.
For I bear witness about them that they have zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
For being ignorant of the righteousness of God and seeking to establish the own righteousness, they did not submit to the righteousness of God.
For the end of Law is Christ, unto righteousness to everyone believing.
For Moses writes of the righteousness that is of the Law that “The man having done these things will live by them.”
But the righteousness of faith speaks thus: “You should not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ (that is, to bring down Christ)
or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ (that is, to bring up Christ out from the dead).”
But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your mouth, and in your heart.” That is, the word of faith which we proclaim,
that if you confess with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised Him out from the dead, you will be saved.
For in the heart is belief unto righteousness, and in the mouth is confession unto salvation.
For the Scripture says, “Everyone believing on Him will not be put to shame.”
For there is no difference between Jew and Greek; for the same Lord of all is rich toward all those calling Him,
for, “Whoever shall call upon the name of the Lord will be saved.”
How then shall they call on Him whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe on Him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear apart from preaching?
And how shall they preach unless they are sent? As it has been written: “How beautiful are the feet of those proclaiming good news of good things!”
But not all heeded the good news. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our report?”
So faith is from hearing, and hearing through the word of Christ.
But I ask, did they not hear? Indeed: “Their voice has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.”
But I ask, did Israel not know? First, Moses says: “I will provoke you to jealousy by those not a nation; I will anger you by a nation without understanding.”
And Isaiah is very bold and says: “I was found by those not seeking Me; I became manifest to those not inquiring after Me.”
But as for Israel he says: “All the day I have stretched out My hands to a disobeying and contradicting people.”
I ask, then did God reject His people? Never may it be! For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God did not reject His people, whom He foreknew. Or do you not know what the Scripture says in Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel:
“Lord, they have killed Your prophets, they have torn down Your altars, and I alone have been left, and they are seeking my life”?
But what was the divine answer spoken to him? “I have left to Myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
So then also, in the present time, there has been a remnant according to the election of grace.
And if by grace, it is no longer from works; otherwise grace no longer would be grace.
What then? What Israel is seeking, this it has not obtained, but the elect obtained it. And the rest were hardened,
as it has been written: “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes not to see, and ears not to hear, unto this very day.”
And David says: “Let their table be for a snare and for a trap, and for a stumbling block and for a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened not to see, and their backs bent over forever.”
I ask then, did they stumble that they might fall? Never may it be! But in their trespass is salvation to the Gentiles, so as to provoke them to jealousy.
But if their trespass is the riches of the world, and their failure is the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness!
Now I am speaking to you the Gentiles. Therefore indeed inasmuch as I am apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry,
if at all I shall provoke to jealousy my own flesh, and shall save some of them.
For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be if not life out from the dead?
Now if the firstfruit is holy, also the lump; and if the root is holy, also the branches.
But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them, and have become a fellow-partaker of the fatness of the root of the olive tree,
do not boast over the branches. And if you boast against them, you do not support the root, but the root you.
You will say, then, “Branches were broken off, that I might be grafted in.”
Rightly so: They were broken off by the unbelief, but you stand by faith. Do not be high minded, but be afraid.
For if God did not at all spare the natural branches, neither will He spare you.
Behold therefore the kindness and severity of God: severity indeed upon those having fallen, but kindness of God toward you, if you continue in the kindness; otherwise you also will be cut off.
And even they, if they do not continue in unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
For if you were cut off out of the naturally wild olive tree, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these, the natural, be grafted into the own olive tree!
For I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, of this mystery, so that you may not be wise in yourselves: A hardening in part has happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles may come in.
And so all Israel will be saved, as it has been written: “The One Delivering will come out of Zion, He will remove ungodliness from Jacob.
And this is the covenant from Me to them, when I shall take away their sins.”
For as regards the gospel, they are enemies on account of you; but as regards election, beloved on account of the patriarchs.
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
For just as you once were disobedient to God, but now have been shown mercy by the disobedience of these,
so these also now have been disobedient for your mercy, so that they also now may have mercy shown them.
For God has bound up all in disobedience, that He may show mercy to all.
O, the depth of riches, both of wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable His judgments, and untraceable His ways!
“For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been His counselor?”
“Or who has first given to Him, and it will be recompensed to him?”
For from Him and through Him and unto Him are all things. To Him be the glory to the ages! Amen.
Therefore I exhort you, brothers, through the compassions of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy to God, well-pleasing, which is your reasonable service.
And do not be conformed to this age, but be transformed by the renewing of the mind, for you to prove what is the good and well-pleasing and perfect will of God.
For through the grace having been given to me, I say to everyone being among you, not to be high-minded above what it behooves you to think, but to think so as to be sober-minded, as God has allotted to each a measure of faith.
For just as in one body we have many members, and not all the members have the same function,
so we, the many, are one body in Christ; and individually members one of another.
And we are having different gifts according to the grace having been given to us: if prophecy, according to the proportion of the faith;
or service, in the service; or teaching, in the teaching;
or exhorting, in the exhortation; giving, in generosity; leading, in diligence; showing mercy, in cheerfulness.
Let love be unfeigned: abhorring evil, cleaving to good,
devoted to one another in brotherly love, esteeming one another in honor,
not lagging in diligence, being fervent in spirit, serving the Lord,
rejoicing in hope, being patient in tribulation, being constant in prayer,
contributing to the needs of the saints, pursuing hospitality.
Bless those persecuting you. Bless and do not curse;
to rejoice with the rejoicing, to weep with the weeping;
minding the same thing toward one another, not minding the things haughty, but going along with the lowly. Do not be wise in yourselves,
repaying to no one evil for evil, providing right before all men;
if possible of you, living at peace with all men;
never avenging yourselves, beloved; instead give place to wrath, for it has been written: “Vengeance is Mine, I will repay, says the Lord.”
On the contrary, “If your enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him to drink; for doing this, you will heap coals of fire upon his head.”
Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
Let every soul be subject to the authorities being above him. For there is no authority except by God; but those existing are having been instituted by God.
Therefore the one rebelling against the authority has resisted the ordinance of God, and those having resisted will bring judgment upon themselves.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil. Now do you desire not to fear the authority? Do the good, and you will have praise from him.
For he is God’s servant to you for good. But if you do evil, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For He is God’s servant, an avenger for wrath to the one doing evil.
Therefore it is necessary to be subject, not only on account of wrath, but also on account of the conscience.
For because of this, you also pay taxes; for they are servants of God, attending continually upon this very thing.
Render to all their dues: tax to whom tax, revenue to whom revenue, respect to whom respect, honor to whom honor.
Owe nothing to anyone, except to love one another; for the one loving the other has fulfilled the Law.
For, “You shall not commit adultery,” “You shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not covet,” and if there is any other commandment, it is summed up in this word, in, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”
Love does not do evil to its neighbor; therefore love is the fulfillment of the Law.
And do this knowing the time, that it is already the hour for you to awaken out of sleep; for our salvation is nearer now than when first we believed.
The night is nearly over, and the day has drawn near; therefore we should cast off the works of darkness and should put on the armor of light.
We should walk properly, as in daytime; not in reveling and drinking, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in dissension and jealousy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the desires of the flesh.
Now receive the one being weak in the faith, not for passing judgment on reasonings.
Indeed, one believes to eat all things; but the one being weak eats vegetables.
The one eating, let him not despise the one not eating; and the one not eating, let him not judge the one eating, for God has received him.
Who are you, judging another’s servant? To the own master he stands or falls. And he will be upheld, for the Lord is able to uphold him.
For indeed one judges a day to be above another day, but one judges every day alike. Let each be fully assured in the own mind.
The one regarding the day, regards it to the Lord; the one eating, eats to the Lord, for he gives thanks to God; and the one not eating, does not eat to the Lord and gives thanks to God.
For none of us lives to himself, and no one dies to himself.
For both if we should live, we live to the Lord; and if we should die, we die to the Lord. Therefore both if we should live and if we should die, we are the Lord’s.
For unto this, Christ died and lived again that He might rule over both the dead and living.
But why do you judge your brother, or why also do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.
For it has been written: “I live, says the Lord, that every knee will bow to Me, and every tongue will confess to God.”
So then, each of us will give account concerning himself to God.
No longer, therefore, should we judge one another; but rather determine this, not to put any stumbling block or snare before your brother.
I know and I am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean of itself, except to him reckoning anything to be unclean—to that one it is unclean.
For if on account of food your brother is grieved, no longer are you walking according to love. Do not destroy with food that one of you for whom Christ died.
Therefore let not your good be spoken of as evil.
For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
For the one serving Christ in these things is well-pleasing to God and approved by men.
So then, we should pursue the things of peace, and the things for edification among each other.
Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. All things indeed are clean, but it is wrong to the man eating through a stumbling block.
It is good neither to eat meat, nor to drink wine, nor anything in which your brother stumbles.
The faith that you have, keep to yourself before God. Blessed is the one not judging himself in what he approves.
But the one doubting has been condemned if he eats, because it is not of faith; and anything that is not of faith is sin.
Now we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the weak and not to please ourselves.
Let each of us please the neighbor unto the good, for edification.
For even Christ did not please Himself, but as it has been written: “The reproaches of those reproaching You have fallen on Me.”
For whatever was written in the past was all written for our instruction, so that through endurance and through the encouragement of the Scriptures, we might have hope.
Now may the God of endurance and encouragement give you to be of the same mind with one another, according to Christ Jesus,
so that with one accord, with one mouth, you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore receive one another as Christ also received you, to the glory of God.
For I declare Christ to have become a servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, in order to confirm the promises given to the fathers,
and for the Gentiles to glorify God for mercy, as it has been written: “Because of this I will praise You among the Gentiles, and will I sing to Your name.”
And again it says: “Rejoice you Gentiles, with His people.”
And again: “Praise the Lord all the Gentiles, and praise Him, all the peoples.”
And again, Isaiah says: “There will be the root of Jesse, and the One arising to rule over the Gentiles; in Him the Gentiles will hope.”
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, for you to abound in hope in the power of the Holy Spirit.
And I myself also am persuaded concerning you my brothers, that you yourselves are also full of goodness, being filled with all knowledge, and being able to admonish one another.
But I have written to you more boldly in part, as reminding you, because of the grace having been given to me by God
for me to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, administering the sacred service of the gospel of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles might become acceptable, having been sanctified in the Holy Spirit.
Therefore I have the boasting in Christ Jesus in the things pertaining to God.
For I will not dare to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me unto the obedience of the Gentiles by word and deed,
in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God, so as for me, from Jerusalem and around unto Illyricum, to have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ,
and thus being ambitious to preach the gospel where Christ had not been named, so that I might not build upon another’s foundation.
Rather, as it has been written: “They will see, to whom it was not proclaimed concerning Him; and those who have not heard will understand.”
Therefore also I have been hindered many times to come to you.
But now, no longer having a place in these regions, and having had a great desire for many years to come to you,
whenever I may go to Spain, I hope indeed, going through, to see you and to be equipped there by you, if first I should be filled of you in part.
But now I am going to Jerusalem, ministering to the saints.
For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
For they were pleased, and they are debtors of them. For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they ought also to minister to them in the material things.
Therefore having finished this, and having sealed this fruit to them, I will set off through you into Spain.
Now I know that coming to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ.
Now I exhort you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in the prayers for me to God,
so that I may be delivered from those refusing to be persuaded in Judea, and that my service in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints,
so that having come to you in joy, by the will of God I may be refreshed with you.
Now the God of peace be with all of you. Amen.
Now I commend to you Phoebe our sister, being also a servant of the church in Cenchrea,
that you might receive her in the Lord worthily of the saints, and you might assist her in whatever matter she may need of you. For she also has been a patroness of many, and of me myself.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus—
who have lain down their neck for my life, whom not only I thank, but also all the churches of the Gentiles—
and the church at their house. Greet Epenetus, my beloved, who is a firstfruit of Asia for Christ.
Greet Mary, who toiled much for you.
Greet Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, and who were in Christ before me.
Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord.
Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys.
Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ. Greet those of the household of Aristobulus.
Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet those of the household of Narcissus being in the Lord.
Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa, those toiling in the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved, who toiled much in the Lord.
Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.
Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the saints with them.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you.
Now I exhort you, brothers, to consider those causing divisions and obstacles contrary to the teaching that you have learned, and turn away from them.
For such do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own belly; and by smooth talk and flattery they deceive the hearts of the naive.
For your obedience has reached to all. Therefore I rejoice over you. But I wish you to be wise to good, and innocent to evil.
And in a short time the God of peace will crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you; also Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen.
I Tertius, the one having written down this letter, greet you in the Lord.
Gaius, the host of me and of all the church, greets you. Erastus, the steward of the city, greets you, and Quartus, the brother.

Now to Him being able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery having been kept secret in times of the ages,
but now having been made manifest also through the prophetic Scriptures, according to the commandment of the Eternal God, having been made known to all the Gentiles unto the obedience of faith—
to the only wise God be the glory to the ages of the ages, which is through Jesus Christ. Amen.
Paul, a called apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Sosthenes, our brother,
To the church of God being in Corinth, having been sanctified in Christ Jesus, called holy, together with all those in every place calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always concerning you for the grace of God having been given you in Christ Jesus,
that in everything you have been enriched in Him, in all speech and all knowledge,
as the testimony about Christ was confirmed in you,
so as for you not to be lacking in any gift as you eagerly await the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who also will sustain you to the end, blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful, by whom you were called into fellowship with His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I exhort you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and there be no divisions among you, but you may be having been knit together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
For it was shown to me concerning you, my brothers, by those of Chloe, that there are quarrels among you.
Now I mean this, that each of you says, “I indeed am of Paul,” and “I of Apollos,” and “I of Cephas,” and “I of Christ.”
Has Christ been divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized into the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crispus and Gaius,
so that no one should say that you were baptized into my name.
Now also I baptized the household of Stephanas; as to the rest, I do not know whether I baptized any other.
For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel; not in wisdom of discourse, so that the cross of the Christ should not be emptied of its power.
For the message of the cross is foolishness to those indeed perishing, but to us being saved it is the power of God.
For it has been written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; and the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate.”
Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?
For since in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom did not know God, God was pleased through the foolishness of the proclamation to save those believing.
Forasmuch as both Jews ask for signs, and Greeks seek wisdom,
we, however, preach Christ having been crucified, a stumbling block indeed to the Jewish and foolishness to Gentiles,
but those called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
For the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God stronger than men.
For consider your calling, brothers, that not many were wise according to the flesh, not many powerful, not many of noble birth.
But God has chosen the foolish things of the world that He might shame the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world that He might shame the strong;
and the low-born of the world, and the things being despised, God also chose—the things not being—that He might annul the things being,
so that all flesh may not boast before God.
But out of Him, you are in Christ Jesus, who has been made unto us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption,
in order that, as it has been written: “The one boasting, let him boast in the Lord.”
And I having come to you, brothers, did not come according to excellency of speech or wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God.
For I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and Him having been crucified.
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.
And my message and my preaching were not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
so that your faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
But we speak wisdom among the mature, but not the wisdom of this age, nor of the rulers of this age, who are coming to naught.
But we speak in a mystery, the wisdom of God having been hidden, which God foreordained before the ages for our glory,
which none of the rulers of this age has understood. For if they had understood it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
But as it has been written: “What no eye has seen, and no ear has heard, and has not entered into heart of man, what God has prepared for those loving Him.”
For God has revealed it to us through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God.
For who among men knows the things of the man, except the spirit of the man within him? So also, no one knows the things of God, except the Spirit of God.
Now we have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit from God, that we may know the things having been granted to us by God,
which also we speak, not in words taught of human wisdom, but in those taught of the Spirit, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means.
But the natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him, and he is not able to understand them, because spiritually they are discerned.
But he who is spiritual judges all things, but he himself is judged by no one.
“For who has known the mind of the Lord? Who will instruct Him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
And I, brothers, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as fleshly—as to infants in Christ.
I gave you milk to drink, not solid food, for not yet were you able. In fact, now you are still not able,
for you are still fleshly. For where jealousy and strife are among you, are you not fleshly, and are walking according to man?
For when one might say, “I indeed am of Paul,” but another, “I of Apollos,” are you not fleshly?
Who then is Apollos? And who is Paul? Servants through whom you believed, even as the Lord has given to each.
I planted, Apollos watered, but God kept it growing.
So neither the one planting nor the one watering is anything, but only God, the One giving growth.
Now the one planting and the one watering are one, and each will receive the own reward, according to the own labor.
For we are God’s fellow workers; you are God’s field, God’s building.
According to the grace of God having been given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, but another is building upon it. But let each one take heed how he builds upon it.
For no one is able to lay another foundation, besides the one being already laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Now if anyone builds upon the foundation using gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
the work of each will become manifest, for the day will disclose it, because it is revealed in fire, and the fire itself will prove the work of each, what sort it is.
If the work of anyone that he built up will remain, he will receive a reward.
If the work of anyone will be burned up, he will suffer loss; but he himself will be saved, but so as through fire.
Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s temple, and the Spirit of God dwells in you?
If anyone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy him; for God’s temple is holy, which you are.
Let no one deceive himself: If anyone among you thinks himself to be wise in this age, let him become foolish, so that he may become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it has been written: “He is the One catching the wise in their craftiness.”
and again, “The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are futile.”
Therefore let no one boast in men. For all things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come—all are yours,
and you of Christ, and Christ of God.
So let a man regard us as servants of Christ and stewards of God’s mysteries.
In this case, moreover, it is required in the stewards, that one shall be found faithful.
But to me, it is the smallest matter that I be examined by you or by a human court. In fact, neither do I examine myself.
For I am conscious of nothing against myself, yet I have not been justified by this; but the One judging me is the Lord.
Therefore do not judge anything before the time, until the Lord shall have come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the motives of the hearts; and then the praise will come to each from God.
Now I have applied these things, brothers, to myself and Apollos, on account of you, so that in us you may learn, “not beyond what has been written,” so that not one of you should be puffed up for one over the other.
For who makes you any different? And what do you have that you did not receive? And if also you did receive it, why do you boast as not having received it?
Already you are satiated; already you have been enriched; apart from us you reigned; and I wish that really you did reign, so that we also might reign with you.
For I think God has exhibited us, the apostles, last, as appointed to death, because we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and to men.
We are fools on account of Christ, but you are wise in Christ; we are weak, but you are strong; You are honored, but we are without honor.
As far as the present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are poorly clad, and are buffeted, and wander homeless,
and we toil, working with our own hands. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure;
being slandered, we entreat. We have become as the residue of the world, the refuse of all, until now.
I do not write these things shaming you, but admonishing you as my beloved children.
For if you should have ten thousand guardians in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.
Therefore I exhort you, become imitators of me.
On account of this I sent to you Timothy, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind of you my ways that are in Christ Jesus, as I teach everywhere in every church.
Now some have become puffed up, as if I were not coming to you.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord wills, and I will find out not the talk of those being puffed up, but their power.
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
What do you desire? Should I come to you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of gentleness?
Sexual immorality is actually reported among you, and sexual immorality such as is not even among the pagans, so as for one to have the wife of the father.
And you are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, so that the one having done this deed might be taken out of your midst!
For I, though being absent in body, now being present in spirit, have already judged the one having thus produced this, as being present,
in the name our Lord Jesus, of you having been gathered together and of me in spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus,
to deliver such a one to Satan for destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?
Cleanse out the old leaven, that you may be a new lump, as you are, unleavened. For also Christ our Passover lamb has been sacrificed,
so that we might celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, not with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and of truth.
I wrote to you in the letter not to associate with the sexually immoral,
not altogether with the sexually immoral of this world, or with the covetous and swindlers, or idolaters—since then you would need to depart from the world.
But now, I wrote to you not to associate with anyone being designated a brother if he is sexually immoral or a coveter, or an idolater or verbal abuser, or a drunkard or swindler—with such a one not even to eat.
For what is it to me to judge those outside? Do you not judge those within?
But God will judge those outside. “Expel the evil out from among yourselves.”
Anyone of you having a matter against the other, dare he go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?
Or do you not know that saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you unworthy of the smallest of cases?
Do you not know that we will judge angels? How much more the things of this life?
So indeed, if you have judgment as to the things of this life, set you up those the ones being despised in the church!
I say this to you for shame. Thus is there not one wise man among you who will be able to decide in between his brother?
Instead, brother goes to law against brother, and this before unbelievers!
Therefore indeed it is already altogether a defeat for you that you have lawsuits among one another. Why not rather suffer wrong? Why not rather be defrauded?
But you do wrong and defraud, and these things to brothers!
Or do you not know that the unrighteous ones will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor homosexuals,
nor thieves, nor coveters, not drunkards, nor verbal abusers, nor swindlers, will inherit the kingdom of God.
And some of you were such. But you were washed, but you were sanctified, but you were justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
“All things are lawful to me,” but not all things do profit. “All things are lawful to me,” but I will not be mastered by anything.
“Foods for the belly and the belly for foods,” but God will destroy both this and these. Now the body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
And by His power God has both raised up the Lord, and will raise us out.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Having taken then the members of the Christ, shall I make them members of a prostitute? Never may it be!
Or do you not know that the one being joined to the prostitute is one body? For it says, “The two will become into one flesh.”
But the one being joined to the Lord is one spirit.
Flee sexual immorality. Every sin, whatever if a man might do, is outside the body, but the one sinning sexually sins against the own body.
Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit in you, whom you have from God? And you are not your own,
for you were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body.
Now concerning the things about which you wrote: It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
But because of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have the own husband.
Let the husband fulfill the duty to the wife, and likewise also the wife to the husband.
The wife does not have authority over the own body, but the husband; and likewise also, the husband does not have authority over the own body, but the wife.
Do not deprive one another, except by mutual agreement, for a time, that you might be at leisure for prayer; and be together the same again, so that Satan may not tempt you through your lack of self-control.
Now I say this by way of concession, not by way of command.
And I wish all men to be even like myself. But each has his own gift from God; for one has this, but one that.
Now I say to the unmarried and to the widows, it is good for them if they should remain as even I.
But if they do not have self-control, let them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
Now to those having married I give this charge (not I, but the Lord): A wife is not to be separated from a husband.
But if indeed she is separated, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to the husband; and a husband is not to send away a wife.
Now to the rest I say (I, not the Lord): If any brother has an unbelieving wife and she consents to dwell with him, let him not divorce her.
And if any woman has an unbelieving husband, and he consents to dwell with her, let her not divorce the husband.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband. Otherwise, your children are unclean; but now they are holy.
But if the unbeliever separates himself, let him separate himself. The brother or the sister is not under bondage in such cases. But God has called you into peace.
For how do you know, wife, if you will save the husband? Or how do you know, husband, if you will save the wife?
Nevertheless, as the Lord has assigned to each, as God has called to each, so let him walk. And thus I prescribe in all the churches.
Was anyone called having been circumcised? Let him not be uncircumcised. Was anyone called in uncircumcision? Let Him not be circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the commandments of God.
Each in the calling in which he has been called, in this let him abide.
Were you called while a slave, let it not be a care to you; but if also you are able to become free, rather take advantage.
For the one having been called in the Lord while a slave is the Lord’s freedman; likewise the one having been called while free is a slave of Christ.
You were bought with a price; do not become slaves of men.
Each, wherein that he was called, brothers, in that let him abide with God.
Now concerning virgins, I do not have a commandment of the Lord, but I give judgment as having received mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy.
Therefore I think this is good, because of the present necessity, that it is good for a man to remain in the same manner.
Have you been bound to a wife? Do not seek to be loosed. Have you been loosed from a wife? Do not seek a wife.
But if also you shall have married, you did not sin; and if the virgin shall have married, she did not sin. But such will have tribulation in the flesh, and I am sparing you.
Now I say this, brothers: The season is shortened; that from now on both those having wives, should be as having none;
and those weeping, as not weeping; and those rejoicing, as not rejoicing; and those buying, as not possessing;
and those using the world, as not using it as their own. For the present form of this world is passing away.
And I desire you to be without concern. The unmarried man cares for the things of the Lord, how he should please the Lord;
but the one having been married cares for the things of the world, how he should please the wife,
and is divided. And the unmarried woman and virgin cares for the things of the Lord, that she should be holy both in body and in spirit; but the one having been married cares for the things of the world, how she should please the husband.
Now I say this for your own benefit, not that I might place upon you a restraint, but for what is seemly and devoted to the Lord, without distraction.
But if anyone supposes to be behaving improperly to his virgin, if she is beyond youth, and it ought to be so, let him do what he wills; he does not sin; let them marry.
But he who stands firm in his heart, not having necessity, but having authority over the own will, and has judged this in the own heart, to keep his virgin, he will do well.
So then also, the one marrying the own virgin does well, and the one not marrying will do better.
A wife is bound for as long a time as her husband may live; but if the husband shall have died, she is free to be married to whom she wills, only in the Lord.
But she is more blessed if she should remain in the same manner, according to my judgment; and I think myself also to have the Spirit of God.
Now concerning the things sacrificed to idols, we know indeed we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
If anyone thinks to have known anything, not yet does he know as it is necessary to know.
But if anyone loves God, he is known by Him.
Therefore concerning the eating of the things sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God except one.
Truly even if indeed there are those called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, as there are many gods and many lords,
yet to us there is one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we for Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we through Him.
But this knowledge is not in all. And some, by habit of the idol until now, eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol; and their conscience being weak, it is defiled.
But food will not commend us to God; neither if we should eat do we come short, nor if we should not eat, do we have an advantage.
But be careful, lest somehow this right of yours becomes an occasion of stumbling to those being weak.
For if anyone sees you, having knowledge, eating in an idol’s temple, will not his conscience, being weak, be built up so as to eat the things sacrificed to idols?
For the one being weak is destroyed through your knowledge—the brother for whom Christ died.
And thus sinning against the brothers and wounding their being weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
Therefore, if food snares my brother, never shall not I eat meat to the age, so that I might not snare my brother.
Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
If I am not an apostle to others, yet at least I am to you; for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
This is my defense to those examining me:
Have we no authority to eat and to drink?
Have we no authority to take about a believer as a wife, as also the other apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Or only I and Barnabas, have we no authority not to work?
Who at any time serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat the fruit of it? Or who shepherds a flock and does not drink from the milk of the flock?
Do I speak these things according to man? Or does the Law not also say these things?
For in the Law of Moses it has been written: “You shall not muzzle an ox treading out grain.” Is there care for the oxen with God?
Or is He speaking because of us entirely? For it was written for us, because in hope the one plowing ought to plow, and the one threshing, in hope to partake.
If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it a great thing if we will reap material things from you?
If others partake of the authority over you, should we not more? But we did not use this right. Instead, we bear all things, so that we should not place any hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
Do you not know that those working in the temple eat the things of the temple; those attending at the altar partake in the altar?
So also, the Lord has prescribed to those proclaiming the gospel to live from the gospel.
But I have not used any of these. And neither have I written these things that it should be thus with me; for it would be better to me to die, rather than that anyone will make void my boasting.
For if I preach the gospel, there is no boasting to me, for necessity is laid upon me. But woe be to me if I should not preach the gospel.
For if I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if unwillingly, I am entrusted with a stewardship.
What then is my reward? That in preaching the gospel, I should offer the gospel free of charge, so as not to use up my right in the gospel.
For being free from all, I myself became servant to all, so that I might win the more.
And to the Jews I became like a Jew, so that I might win the Jews. To those under the Law, as under the Law (myself not being under the Law) so that I might win those under the Law.
To those outside the Law, as outside the Law (not being outside the law of God, but under the law of Christ) so that I might win those outside the Law.
To the weak I became weak, that I might win the weak. I have become all these things to all, so that by all means I might save some.
Now I do all things on account of the gospel, that I might become a fellow partaker with it.
Do you not know that those running in a race course, indeed all run, but one receives the prize? Run thus, that you might obtain it.
Now everyone striving controls himself in all things; then indeed they, that they might receive a perishable crown; but we, an imperishable.
Therefore I run thus, not as uncertainly; I fight thus, not as beating the air.
But I batter my body and bring it into servitude, lest having preached to others, I myself might be disqualified.
For I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea.
And all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,
and all ate the same spiritual food,
and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they were drinking from the spiritual rock accompanying them, and the rock was Christ.
Nevertheless, God was not well pleased with most of them, for they were strewn in the wilderness.
Now these things have become types to us, for us not to be desirers of evil things, as they also desired.
Neither are you to be idolaters, as some of them, as it has been written: “The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.”
Neither should we commit sexual immorality, as some of them committed sexual immorality, and twenty-three thousand fell in one day.
Neither should we test the Christ, as some of them tested, and were destroyed by serpents.
Neither are you to grumble, as some of them grumbled, and perished by the Destroyer.
Now these things happened to them as types and were written for our admonition, to whom the ends of the ages are arrived.
Therefore the one thinking to stand, let him take heed, lest he fall.
No temptation has seized you, except what is common to man. And God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but will also provide with the temptation the escape, to be able to endure it.
Therefore my beloved, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to sensible ones; judge for yourselves what I say.
Is not the cup of blessing that we bless a participation in the blood of Christ? Is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ?
Because there is one loaf, we the many are one body; for we all partake of the one loaf.
Consider Israel according to flesh: Are not those eating the sacrifices fellow partakers in the altar?
Then what do I mean? That what is sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
Rather, that what the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God. And I do not want you to be fellow partakers with demons.
You are not able to drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You are not able to partake of the table of the Lord and of the table of demons.
Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than He?
“All things are lawful,” but not all things are profitable; “All things are lawful,” but not all edify.
Let no one seek the good of himself, but that of the other.
Eat everything being sold in the meat market, inquiring nothing on account of conscience,
for, “The earth is the Lord’s, and its fullness.”
If anyone unbelieving invites you, and you wish to go, eat everything being set before you, inquiring nothing on account of conscience.
But if anyone should say to you, “This is offered to an idol,” do not eat, on account of him having shown it, and conscience—
and I am not saying your own conscience, but that of the other; for why is my freedom judged by another’s conscience?
If I partake with thankfulness, why am I denounced for that which I give thanks?
Therefore whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do all things to the glory of God.
Be you without offense both to Jews and Greeks, and to the church of God—
as I also please all in all things, not seeking my own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved.
Be imitators of me, as I also am of Christ.
Now I commend you that you have remembered me in all things, and you are keeping the teachings as I delivered to you.
But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the head of the woman, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying having anything on his head dishonors his head.
And every woman praying or prophesying with the head uncovered dishonors her head; for it is one and the same with having been shaven.
For if a woman does not cover her head, also let her be shorn. And if it is disgraceful to a woman to be shorn or to be shaven, let her cover her head.
For truly a man ought not to cover the head, being the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of man.
For man is not of woman, but woman of man.
For truly man was not created on account of the woman, but woman on account of the man.
Because of this, the woman ought to have authority on the head, on account of the angels.
However, neither is woman separate from man, nor man separate from woman in the Lord.
For just as the woman is of the man, so also the man is by the woman. And all things are of God.
Judge for yourselves: Is it becoming for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
Does not even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair it is a dishonor to him,
but if a woman has long hair, it is to her glory? For the long hair instead of a covering is given to her.
Now if anyone is inclined to be contentious, we have no such practice, nor do the churches of God.
Now in this instructing, I do not praise you, because you come together not for the better, but for the worse.
For first indeed, of you coming together in an assembly, I hear there to be divisions among you, and in part I believe it.
For also it behooves there to be factions among you, so that also the approved should become evident among you.
Therefore, of you coming together in one place, it is not to eat the Lord’s supper.
For in eating, one takes first the own supper. And indeed this one is hungry, but that one is drunken.
What! Have you no houses in which to eat and to drink? Or do you despise the church of God and put to shame those having nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I do not praise you!
For I received from the Lord that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which He was betrayed, took bread,
and having given thanks, He broke it and said, “This is My body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of Me.”
Likewise also the cup after having supped, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood; do this as often as you might drink it, in remembrance of Me.”
For as often as you may eat this bread and may drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until He should come.
Therefore whoever should eat the bread or should drink the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty of the body and of the blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and in this manner let him eat of the bread, and let him drink of the cup.
For the one eating and drinking not discerning the body, eats and drinks judgment on himself.
Because of this, many are weak and sick among you, and many are fallen asleep.
For if we were judging ourselves, we would not come under judgment.
But being judged by the Lord, we are disciplined, so that we should not be condemned with the world.
So then, my brothers, coming together in order to eat, wait for one another.
If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, so that you might not come together for judgment; and I will set in order the other things as soon as I might come.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be ignorant.
You know that when you were pagans, to mute idols you were led, as being carried away.
Therefore I make known to you that no one speaking in the Spirit of God says, “Jesus is accursed,” and no one is able to say, “Jesus is Lord,” if not in the Holy Spirit.
Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit;
and there are varieties of services, but the same Lord;
and there are varieties of workings, but the same God is working all things in everyone.
Now to each is given the manifestation of the Spirit, for the common profiting.
For truly, to one is given a word of wisdom by the Spirit, and to another a word of knowledge according to the same Spirit,
and to a different one faith by the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit,
and to another working of miracles, and to another prophecy, and to another distinguishing of spirits, and to a different one various kinds of tongues, and to another interpretation of tongues.
Now one and the same the Spirit works all these things, apportioning individually to each as He wills.
For just as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body being many are one body, so also is Christ.
For also in one Spirit we all were baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all made to drink one Spirit.
For also the body is not one member, but many.
If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body,” not on account of this is it not of the body.
And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body,” not on account of this is it not of the body.
If all the body were an eye, where would be the hearing? If all were hearing, where would be the sense of smell?
But now God has arranged the members, each one of them in the body, as He desired.
And if all were one member, where would be the body?
But now indeed, there are many members, but one body.
Now the eye is not able to say to the hand, “I have no need of you.” Or again the head to the feet, “I have no need of you.”
But much rather, those members of the body seeming to be weaker are necessary,
and those of the body we think to be less honorable, these we bestow more abundant honor. And our unpresentable parts have more abundant decorum,
but our presentable parts have no need. But God has composed the body, having given more abundant honor to the parts being deficient,
that there should be no division in the body, but the members should have the same concern for one another.
And if one member suffers, all the members suffer with it; if one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
Now you are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
And some indeed God has appointed in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, third teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, helping, administrating, various kinds of tongues.
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles?
Do all have gifts of healings? Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret?
But earnestly desire the greater gifts. And I show to you now a more surpassing way.
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I have become a sounding brass or a clanging cymbal.
And if I should have prophecy and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I should have all faith so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.
And if I may give away all my possessions, and I may deliver up my body that I may boast, but have not love, I am profited nothing.
Love is patient, love is kind, love is not envious, it is not boastful, it is not puffed up.
It does not act unbecomingly, it does not seek the things of its own, is not easily provoked, it keeps no account of wrongs.
It does not delight at unrighteousness, but rejoices in the truth.
It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Love never fails; but if there are prophesies, they will be done away; if there are tongues, they will be ceased; if there is knowledge it will pass away.
For we know in part and we prophesy in part;
but when the perfect should come, the partial will be done away.
When I was a child, I was speaking like a child, I was thinking like a child, I was reasoning like a child; when I became a man, I did away with the things of the child.
For presently we see through a glass in obscurity; but then, face to face. Presently, I know in part; but then I will know fully, even as I have been fully known.
But now these three things abide: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.
Earnestly pursue love, and earnestly desire spiritual gifts, and especially that you might prophesy.
For the one speaking in a tongue speaks not to men, but to God. For no one hears, but in the Spirit he utters mysteries.
But the one prophesying speaks to men for edification and encouragement and consolation.
The one speaking in a tongue edifies himself, but the one prophesying edifies the church.
Now I desire you all to speak in tongues, but rather that you should prophesy. Now the one prophesying is greater than the one speaking in tongues, unless he should interpret, so that the church might receive edification.
But now brothers, if I should come to you speaking in tongues, what will I profit you, unless I should speak to you either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophecy, or in teaching?
Even lifeless things giving a sound, whether the flute or harp, unless they give distinction to the sounds, how will it be known what is being piped or being harped?
And indeed if the trumpet gives an indistinct sound, who will prepare himself for battle?
So also you, unless you give intelligible speech with the tongue, how will it be known what is being spoken? For you will be speaking into the air.
There are, if it may be, so many kinds of languages in the world, and none without meaning.
Therefore unless I know the power of the sound, I will be a barbarian to the one speaking, and the one speaking, a barbarian to me.
So also you, since you are zealous of spiritual gifts, search for the edification of the church, that you should cause it to abound.
Therefore he who speaks in a tongue, let him pray that he might interpret.
For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
What then is it? I will pray with the spirit, but also I will pray with the mind. I will sing praise with the spirit, but also I will sing praise with the mind.
Otherwise if you bless with the spirit, how will the one filling the place of the uninstructed say the “Amen” at your thanksgiving, since he knows not what you say?
For truly you are giving thanks well, but the other is not edified.
I thank God, speaking in tongues more than all of you.
But in the church, I desire to speak five words with my mind, that also I might instruct others, rather than ten thousand words in a tongue.
Brothers, do not be children in the minds. Yet in the evil, be little children; but in the thinking, be full grown.
In the Law it has been written: “By other tongues, and by other lips, I will speak to this people, and not even thus will they hear Me, says the Lord.”
So then, tongues are for a sign, not to those believing, but to the unbelieving; but prophecy is not to the unbelieving, but to the believing.
Therefore if the whole church gathers together in one place and all should speak in tongues, but uninstructed ones or unbelievers come in, will not they say that you are mad?
But if all prophesy, and some unbeliever or uninstructed should come in, he is convicted by all, he is examined by all,
and the secrets of his heart become manifest. And thus having fallen upon his face, he will worship God, declaring that God is certainly among you.
What then is it, brothers? When you may come together, each has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has a tongue, has an interpretation. Let all things be done for edification.
If anyone speaks with a tongue, let it be by two or the most three, and in turn; and let one interpret.
But if there is no interpreter, let him be silent in the church, and let him speak to himself and to God.
And let two or three prophets speak, and let the others discern.
But if a revelation should be made to another sitting by, let the first be silent.
For you are all able to prophesy one by one, so that all may learn, and all may be exhorted.
And the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets.
For He is not the God of disorder, but of peace. As in all the churches of the saints,
let the women be silent in the churches. For it is not allowed to them to speak, but to be in submission, as the Law also says.
But if they desire to learn anything, let them ask the own husbands at home; for it is shameful for a woman to speak in the church.
Or has the word of God gone out from you? Or has it come to you only?
If anyone considers himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognize that the things I write to you are the commands of the Lord.
But if anyone is ignorant, let him be ignored.
So, my brothers, earnestly desire to prophesy, and do not forbid to speak in tongues.
But let all things be done properly and with order.
Now I make known to you, brothers, the gospel that I proclaimed to you, which also you received, in which you also stand,
by which you are also being saved, if you hold fast to the word I proclaimed to you; otherwise you have believed in vain.
For I delivered to you in the foremost what also I received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
and that He was buried, and that He was raised the third day according to the Scriptures,
and that He appeared to Cephas, then to the Twelve.
Thereafter He appeared to more than five hundred brothers at once, the greater part of whom remain until now, although some have fallen asleep.
Then He appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
And last of all, He appeared also to me, as to one of untimely birth.
For I am the least of the apostles, who am not fit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me has not been void. Rather, I toiled more abundantly than all of them, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.
Therefore whether it was I or they, thus we preach, and thus you believed.
Now if Christ is preached, that He has been raised out from the dead, how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, then also our preaching is void, and your faith is void.
Then also we are found false witnesses of God, because we have witnessed concerning God that He raised up Christ, whom He has not raised if then the dead are not raised.
For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins.
Also then those having fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
If only in this life we are having hope in Christ, we are more to be pitied than all men.
But now Christ has been raised out from the dead, the firstfruit of those having fallen asleep.
For since death came by a man, so also by a man has come the resurrection of the dead.
For as indeed in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.
But each in the own order: Christ the firstfruit, then those of Christ at His coming,
then the end, when He shall hand over the kingdom to the God and Father, when He shall have annulled all dominion, and all authority and power.
For it behooves Him to reign until He shall have put all the enemies under His feet.
The last enemy to be abolished is death.
For “He has put in subjection all things under His feet.” But when it may be said that all things have been put in subjection, it is evident that the One having put in subjection all things to Him is excepted.
Now when all things shall have been put in subjection to Him, then also the Son Himself will be put in subjection to the One having put in subjection all things to Him, so that God may be all in all.
Otherwise what will they do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why also are they baptized for them?
And why are we in danger every hour?
I die every day, as surely as the boasting in you, brothers, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
If according to man I fought wild beasts in Ephesus, what is the profit to me? If the dead are not raised, “Let us eat and let us drink, for tomorrow we die.”
Do not be misled: “Bad companionships corrupt good morals.”
Sober up righteously and do not sin, for some have ignorance of God. I speak to your shame.
But someone will say, “How are the dead raised? And with what body do they come?”
You fool! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
And what you sow is not the body that will be, but you sow a bare grain, if it may be of wheat, or of some of the rest.
But God gives it a body as He has willed, and to each of the seeds, its own body.
Not all flesh is the same, but indeed one flesh is of men, and another flesh is of beasts, and another flesh is of birds, and another is of fish.
And there are heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. But truly the glory of the heavenly is one kind, and that of the earthly is another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for star differs from star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in decay; it is raised in immortality.
It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.
It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual.
So also it has been written: “The first man Adam became into a living soul; the last Adam into a life-giving spirit.”
However, the spiritual was not first, but the natural; then the spiritual.
The first man was made of dust from the earth; the second man from heaven.
As the one was made of dust, so also are those of the earth; and as is the heavenly one, so also are those of heaven.
And as we have born the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.
Now I say this, brothers, that flesh and blood is not able to inherit the kingdom of God, nor does decay inherit immortality.
Behold, I tell to you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed—
in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
For it behooves this, the perishable to put on the imperishable; and this, the mortal to put on immortality.
Now when this the perishable shall have put on the imperishable, and this, the mortal, shall have put on immortality, then the word having been written will come to pass: “Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
“Where O death, is your victory? Where O death is your sting?”
Now the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the Law.
But thanks be to God, the One giving us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil in the Lord is not in vain.
Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have directed the churches of Galatia, so also you are to do.
Every first of the week, let each of you put something aside, treasuring up whatever he may be prospered in, so that when I might come, then there should be no collections.
And when I shall have arrived, whomever you might approve, with letters I will send these to carry your bounty to Jerusalem.
And if it is suitable for me also to go, they will go with me.
But I will come to you when I shall have gone through Macedonia, for I am going through Macedonia.
And possibly I will stay with you, or even I will winter, so that you may equip me, wherever I may go.
For I do not want to see you now in passing; for I hope to remain a certain time with you, if the Lord permits.
But I will remain in Ephesus until Pentecost.
For a great and productive door has opened to me, and many are opposing.
Now if Timothy comes, see that he might be with you without fear, for he is doing the Lord’s work, as I also.
Therefore no one should despise him. But equip him in peace, so that he might come to me; for I am expecting him with the brothers.
Now concerning Apollos our brother, I exhorted him greatly that he should go to you with the brothers, and his will was not at all that he should come now; but he will come when he shall have opportunity.
Watch you; stand firm in the faith; act like men; be strong.
Let all things of you be done in love.
Now I exhort you, brothers—you know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruit of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to service to the saints—
that you also be subject to such as these, and to everyone joining in the work and laboring.
Now I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because these have filled up your deficiency.
For they refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore recognize such as these.
The churches of Asia greet you. Aquila and Prisca, with the church at their house, greet you heartily in the Lord.
All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
The greeting is in my own hand—Paul.
If anyone does not love the Lord, let him be accursed. Maranatha!
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
My love be with all of you in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, To the church of God being in Corinth, with all the saints being in all Achaia.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassions, and God of all comfort,
the One comforting us in all our tribulation, for us to be able to comfort those in every tribulation through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God,
because as the sufferings of the Christ abound toward us, so through Christ our comfort also abounds.
But if we are constricted, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are encouraged, it is for your comfort, operating in the endurance of the same sufferings that we also suffer.
And our hope for you is sure, knowing that as you are partners of our sufferings, so also of our comfort.
For we do not want you to be ignorant brothers, as to our affliction having happened in Asia, that we were weighed against excessively, beyond our power, so as for us to despair even to live.
Indeed we had in ourselves the sentence of death, in order that we should not be trusting in ourselves, but in God, the One raising the dead,
who has delivered us from such a great death and will deliver us, in whom we have hope that also He will deliver us still,
of you also joining together for us by supplication, so that thanks may be given for us by many persons for the grace bestowed toward us through many.
For our boasting is this: the testimony of our conscience that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and more abundantly toward you, in the purity and sincerity of God, and not in fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God.
For we write no other things to you other than what you read or even understand. And I hope that you will understand to the end,
as also you have understood us in part, so that we are your boasting, even as you are also ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus.
And with this confidence I was planning to come to you previously, so that you might have a second blessing of grace,
and through you to pass through into Macedonia, and to come to you again from Macedonia, and to be set forward by you to Judea.
Thus purposing, therefore then, did I use lightness? Or do I purpose what I purpose according to flesh, so that with me there should be “Yes, yes” and “No, no”?
But God is faithful, that our word to you was not “Yes” and “No.”
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, having been proclaimed among you by us—by me and Silvanus and Timothy—was not “Yes” and “No,” but it has always been “Yes” in Him.
For as many as are the promises of God, in Him is the “Yes.” Therefore also in Him, the “Amen” by us is for glory to God.
Now the One establishing us with you unto Christ, and having anointed us, is God,
the One also having sealed us and having given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.
But I call God as witness upon my soul, that sparing you, I have not yet come to Corinth.
Not that we lord it over your faith, but are fellow workers with you of joy; for in the faith you stand firm.
For I judged this within myself, not to come to you again in grief.
For if I grieve you again, who is making me glad, except the one being grieved by me?
And I wrote this same thing, so that having come, I might not have grief from those of whom it behooves me to rejoice, trusting in you all, that my joy is shared by all of you.
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote to you through many tears, not that you might be grieved, but that you might know the love that I have more abundantly toward you.
But if anyone has caused grief, he not grieved me, but—in part, that I might not put it too severely—you all.
The punishment which is by the majority is sufficient to such a one,
so that on the contrary, rather for you to forgive and to comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be overwhelmed by more abundant sorrow.
Therefore I exhort you to confirm your love toward him.
For this indeed also did I write, so that I might know the proof of you, whether you are obedient to everything.
Now to whomever you forgive anything, I also do; and indeed to whom I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, it is for the sake of you, in the person of Christ,
so that we should not be outwitted by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his schemes.
Now having come to Troas for the gospel of Christ, a door also having been opened to me in the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, in my not finding Titus my brother. Instead, having taken leave of them, I went out to Macedonia.
But thanks be to God, the One always leading us in triumph in Christ, and through us in every place making manifest the fragrance of the knowledge of Him.
For we are a sweet perfume of Christ to God in those being saved and in those perishing:
to one indeed an odor from death to death, and to the other a fragrance from life to life. And who is sufficient for these things?
For we are not like the many, peddling the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, we speak before God in Christ.
Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or like some, do we need commendatory letters to you or from you?
You are our letter, having been inscribed in our hearts, being known and being read by all men,
being revealed that you are a letter of Christ, having been ministered to by us, having been inscribed not in ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone, but on tablets of human hearts.
Now we have such confidence through Christ toward God.
Not that we are sufficient from ourselves to reckon anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God,
who also has made us competent as ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
Now if the ministry of death, having been engraved in letters on stones, was produced in glory, so as for the sons of Israel not to be able to look intently into the face of Moses, on account of the glory of his face which is fading,
how will the ministry of the Spirit not be more in glory?
For if glory was in the ministry of condemnation, much more does the ministry of righteousness abound in glory!
For even that having been made glorious has not been glorified in this respect, on account of the glory surpassing it.
For if that which is fading away was through glory, much more is that remaining in glory!
Therefore having such a hope, we use great boldness,
and not as Moses would put a veil over his face for the sons of Israel not to look intently into the end of that fading away.
But their minds were hardened; for until the present day, the same veil remains at the reading of the old covenant, not being lifted, which is being removed in Christ.
But unto this day, when Moses shall be read, a veil lies over their heart.
But whenever one shall have turned to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Now the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
And we all having been unveiled in face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as from the Lord, the Spirit.
Because of this, having this ministry, as we received mercy, we do not lose heart.
But we have renounced the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor falsifying the word of God, but by manifestation of the truth, commending ourselves to every man’s conscience before God.
But if indeed our gospel is concealed, it is concealed to those who are perishing,
in whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelieving, so as for not to beam forth the illumination of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.
For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord; and ourselves as your servants for the sake of Jesus.
For it is God, having said, “Light shall shine out of darkness,” who shone in our hearts for the radiance of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
Now we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be from God, and not from us,
being hard pressed in every way but not being crushed, being perplexed but not despairing,
being persecuted but not being forsaken, being struck down but not being destroyed,
always carrying around the death of Jesus in our body, so that the life of Jesus also should be manifested in our body.
For we the living are always being delivered to death on account of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our mortal flesh.
So then, death works in us, but life in you.
But having the same spirit of faith according to that having been written: “I believed, therefore I have spoken,” we also believe and therefore speak,
knowing that the One having raised up the Lord Jesus also will raise us up through Jesus and will present us with you.
For all things are for your sake, so that the grace having abounded through more and more people may increase the thanksgiving to the glory of God.
Therefore we do not lose heart; but indeed if our outward man is being brought to decay, yet our inner self is being renewed day and day.
For the momentary lightness of our affliction is producing for us an eternal weight of glory, far surpassing to excessiveness.
We are not looking at the things being seen, but the things not being seen. For the things being seen are temporary, but the things not being seen are eternal.
For we know that if the tent of our earthly house should be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
And indeed, in this we groan, longing to be clothed with our dwelling which is from heaven,
if indeed also having been clothed, we will not be found naked.
And indeed, being in the tent we groan, being burdened, because we do not wish to be unclothed but to be clothed, so that the mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now the One having prepared us for this very purpose is God, having given to us the pledge of the Spirit,
always being confident, then, and knowing that, being at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord.
For we walk by faith, not by sight.
Now we are confident and are pleased rather to be absent out of the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
Therefore also we are ambitious, whether being at home or being away, to be well-pleasing to Him.
For we must all be revealed before the judgment seat of Christ, that each may receive back the things done through the body according to what he did, whether good or evil.
Therefore knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade men. And we have been made manifest to God, and I hope to have been made manifest in your consciences also.
We are not commending ourselves to you again, but are giving to you occasion of boasting on behalf of us, so that you may have an answer toward those boasting in appearance, and not in the heart.
For if we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or if we are sober-minded it is for you.
For the love of Christ compels us, having concluded this, that One has died for all, therefore all have died.
And He died for all that those living no longer should live to themselves, but to the One having died for them and having been raised again.
Therefore from now, we regard no one according to the flesh. Even though we have regarded Christ according to flesh, yet now we regard Him thus no longer.
Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things have passed away; behold, the new has come into being.
Now all things are of God, the One having reconciled us to Himself through Christ, and having given to us the ministry of reconciliation:
how that God was in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not reckoning their trespasses to them, and having put into us the word of reconciliation.
Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God is beseeching through us. We implore on behalf of Christ: Be reconciled to God.
He made the One not having known sin to be sin for us, so that in Him we might become the righteousness of God.
And working together, we also urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain.
For He says: “In the acceptable time I listened to you, and in the day of salvation I helped you.” Behold, now is the time of favor; behold, now is the day of salvation.
Placing no obstacle in anyone’s way so that our ministry should not be blemished,
in everything, rather, we are commending ourselves as God’s servants: in great endurance, in tribulations, in hardships, in distresses;
in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in watchings, in fastings;
in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness; in the Holy Spirit, in genuine love;
in the word of truth, in the power of God; with the weapons of righteousness for the right hand and for the left;
through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report; as imposters and yet true;
as being unknown and yet being well-known; as dying and yet, behold, we live; as being punished and yet not being killed;
as being sorrowful yet always rejoicing; as poor yet enriching many; as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
Our mouth has been opened to you, Corinthians; our heart has been expanded.
You are not restrained by us, but you are restrained in your own affections.
Now as the same recompense, I speak as to children, be you expanded also.
Do not become unequally yoked together with unbelievers. For what partnership have righteousness and lawlessness? Or what fellowship has light with darkness?
And what harmony has Christ with Belial? Or what part to a believer is with an unbeliever?
And what agreement has the temple of God with idols? For we are the temple of the living God. As God has said: “I will dwell in them, and will walk among them; and I will be their God, and they will be My people.”
“Therefore come out from their midst and be separate, says the Lord, and touch nothing unclean, and I will receive you.”
and “I will be for a father to you, and you will be for sons and daughters to Me, says the Lord Almighty.”
Therefore having these promises, beloved, we should cleanse ourselves from every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Make room for us. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have exploited no one.
I do not speak for condemnation; for I have before said that you are in our hearts for us to die together and to live together.
Great is my boldness toward you; great my boasting on behalf of you; I have been filled with encouragement; I overabound with joy upon all our affliction.
And indeed, of us having come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest; but we are being pressed in every way: conflicts on the outside, fears within.
But God, the One comforting the downcast, encouraged us by the coming of Titus,
and not only by his coming, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted as to you, relating to us your earnest desire, your mourning, your zeal for me, so as for me to rejoice the more.
For if also I have grieved you in the letter, I do not regret it. For even if I did regret it, I see that the letter grieved you, even if for an hour.
Now I rejoice, not that you were grieved, but that you were grieved into repentance. For you were grieved according to God, so that you might suffer loss in nothing through us.
For grief according to God produces repentance to salvation without regret; but the world’s grief produces death.
For behold, how much earnestness this very same thing—to have been grieved according to God—has produced in you: but reasoned defense, but indignation, but fear, but longing, but zeal, but vindication! In everything, you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter.
So even if I wrote to you, it was not for the sake of the one having done wrong, nor for the sake of the one having suffered wrong, but rather for the sake of your earnestness for us being revealed to you before God.
On account of this, we have been comforted. And besides our comfort, we have rejoiced the more abundantly rather at the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of you.
For if I have boasted anything to him about you, I was not put to shame; but as we have spoken all things to you in truth, so also our boasting to Titus became truth.
And his affections are more abundantly toward you, remembering the obedience of all of you, how you received him with fear and trembling.
I rejoice that in everything I am confident in you.
Now we make known to you, brothers, the grace of God having been bestowed among the churches of Macedonia,
that in much proof of tribulation, the abundance of their joy and of their deep poverty abounded into the riches of their generosity.
For I testify that according to their ability and beyond their ability, they were willing of themselves,
imploring of us with much entreaty for the grace and the fellowship of the service among the saints.
And not only as we had hoped, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us, by the will of God.
Accordingly, we exhorted Titus that as he had begun, so also he might complete with you this grace as well.
But even as you abound in every way—in faith, and speech, and knowledge, and all earnestness, and in the love from us to you—that also you should abound in this grace.
I do not speak as a command, but proving the genuineness of your love through the earnestness of others also.
For you know the grace our Lord Jesus Christ, that being rich, for the sake of you He became poor, so that you through His poverty might be enriched.
And I give a judgment in this matter, for this is profitable for you who not only have begun from a year ago to act, but also to will.
And now also complete the doing, so that just as there was the readiness to will, so also there may be to complete, out of that which you have.
For if the readiness is present, it is acceptable as if he might have, not as he does not have.
For this is not that to others there may be ease, but for you affliction; but of equality.
At the present time, your abundance will be for their need, so that their abundance also may be for your need, so that there may be equality.
As it has been written: “He the much did not abound, and he the little had no lack.”
But thanks to God, the One putting into the heart of Titus the same earnestness for you.
For indeed he accepted our appeal, but being very earnest, of his own accord he has gone out to you.
And we have sent with him the brother whose praise in the gospel is through all of the churches,
and not only that, but also having been chosen by the churches, he is our fellow traveler with this grace that is being administered by us toward the glory of the Lord himself and our readiness,
avoiding this, lest anyone should blame us in this abundance being administered by us.
For we are taking great care to do what is right, not only before the Lord, but also before men.
Now we sent with them our brother, whom we have proven often in many things to be earnest, but now much more earnest by his confidence which is toward you.
Whether as regards Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker for you; or our brothers, they are apostles of the churches, the glory of Christ.
Therefore show to them the proof of your love and of our boasting about you in the face of the churches.
For it is superfluous for me to write to you now concerning the service for the saints.
For I know your readiness, which I boast of to Macedonians concerning you, that Achaia has been prepared from a year ago, and your zeal has been provoking the greater number.
But I have sent the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not be made void, that you may be prepared, as I have been saying.
Otherwise, if Macedonians should come with me and find you unprepared, we—not that we might say you—would be put to shame in this confidence.
Therefore I esteemed it necessary to exhort the brothers that they should go before unto you and should complete beforehand your foreannounced blessing, thus this to be ready as a blessing, and not as covetousness.
Now this: The one sowing sparingly will also reap sparingly, and the one sowing upon blessings will also reap upon blessings,
each as he purposes in the heart, not out of regret or of necessity. For God loves a cheerful giver.
And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in every way, always, having all sufficiency, you may abound in every good work.
As it has been written: “He has scattered abroad, He has given to the poor; His righteousness abides to the age.”
Now the One supplying seed to the one sowing and bread for food will supply and will multiply your seed for sowing and will increase the fruits of your righteousness,
enriching you in every way to all generosity, which produces through us thanksgiving to God.
For the ministry of this service is not only completely filling up the needs of the saints, but is also overflowing through many thanksgivings to God,
through the proof of this service, glorifying God at your submission of confession to the gospel of Christ, and the generosity of the participation toward them and toward all.
And their supplication is for you, longing for you on account of the surpassing grace of God upon you.
Thanks be to God for His indescribable gift!
Now I, Paul, myself exhort you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, I who indeed as to appearance am humble among you, but being absent am bold toward you.
Now I implore you that being present, I need not to be bold with the confidence with which I reckon to be daring toward some reckoning us as walking according to flesh.
For walking in flesh, we do not wage war according to flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but divinely powerful toward the demolition of strongholds,
overthrowing arguments, and every high thing lifting itself up against the knowledge of God, and taking captive every thought into the obedience of Christ,
and having readiness within to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience may have been fulfilled.
You are looking at things according to appearance. If anyone is persuaded in himself to be of Christ, let him reckon this within himself again, that as he is of Christ, so also are we.
For even if I should boast somewhat more abundantly concerning our authority, which the Lord has given us for building you up and not for tearing you down, I will not be ashamed,
so that I might not seem as if to frighten you by means of the letters.
For they say, “The letters indeed are weighty and strong, but the presence of the body is weak, and the speech having been ignored.”
Let such a one reckon this, that such as we are in word by letters being absent, also such we are in action being present.
For we dare not to classify or to compare ourselves with some commending themselves. But these, measuring themselves by themselves and comparing themselves with themselves, do not understand.
But we will not boast into the things beyond measure, but according to the measure of the area that God has assigned to us, a measure to reach also as far as you.
For we are not overextending ourselves, as not reaching to you. For we came also as far as you in the gospel of Christ,
not boasting to the things beyond measure in others’ labors, but having hope of your faith increasing, to be enlarged to abundance among you according to our area,
so as to preach the gospel beyond you, not to boast in things already in another’s area.
But, “The one boasting, let him boast in the Lord.”
For the one commending himself, this one is not approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.
I wish you were bearing with me a little in foolishness, but indeed you do bear with me.
For I am jealous as to you with the jealousy of God. For I have betrothed you to one husband, to present a pure virgin to Christ.
But I am afraid, lest by any means, as the serpent in his craftiness deceived Eve, your minds might be corrupted from the simplicity and the purity in Christ.
For if indeed the one coming proclaims another Jesus whom we did not proclaim, or you receive a different spirit whom you did not receive, or a different gospel which you did not accept, you are bearing with it well.
For I reckon in nothing to have been inferior to those “most eminent apostles.”
But even if I am unpolished in speech, yet I am not in knowledge; but in every way, we have been made manifest to you in all things.
Or did I commit a sin, humbling myself, so that you might be exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you freely?
I robbed other churches, having received support for service toward you.
And being present with you and having been in need, I did not burden anyone; for the brothers having come from Macedonia completely filled up my need, and in everything I kept and will keep myself unburdensome to you.
The truth of Christ is in me, that this boasting of mine will not be sealed up in the regions of Achaia.
Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!
But what I do, I will continue doing, so that I might cut off the opportunity of those desiring an opportunity that they might be found as also we in what they are boasting.
For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ.
And no wonder, for Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.
Therefore it is not surprising if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness, whose end will be according to their deeds.
Again I say, no one should think me to be a fool; but if otherwise, receive me even as a fool, that I also may boast a little.
What I am saying in this confidence of boasting, I am not saying according to the Lord, but as in foolishness.
Since many boast according to the flesh, I also will boast.
For being wise, you bear with fools gladly!
For you bear it if anyone enslaves you, if anyone devours you, if anyone takes from you, if anyone exalts himself, if anyone strikes you in your face.
I speak as to dishonor, as that we have been weak! But in whatever anyone might dare—I speak in foolishness—I also am daring.
Are they Hebrews? I also. Are they Israelites? I also. Are they descendants of Abraham? I also.
Are they servants of Christ? I speak as being beside myself, I too above measure: more abundantly in labors, more abundantly in imprisonments, in beatings above measure, in deaths often.
Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one.
Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I was shipwrecked. I have passed a night and a day in the deep sea;
in journeyings often, in perils of rivers, in perils of robbers; in perils from my own race, in perils from the Gentiles; in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness; in perils on the sea, in perils among false brothers;
in labor and toil, often in watchings; in hunger and thirst, often in fastings; in cold and nakedness.
Besides the external things, the pressure on me on every day is my care for all the churches.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is led into sin, and I do not burn inwardly?
If it behooves me to boast, I will boast in the things of my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, the One being blessed to the ages, knows that I am not lying.
In Damascus the governor under the king Aretas was guarding the city of the Damascenes to seize me.
But I was let down in a basket through a window through the wall, and I escaped his hands.
It behooves me to boast; it is not profitable indeed, but I will go on to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago—whether in the body, I do not know, or out of the body, I do not know; God knows—such a man, having been caught up to the third heaven.
And I know such a man—whether in the body or out of the body, I do not know; God knows—
that he was caught up into Paradise, and he heard inexpressible words, not being permitted to man to speak.
Concerning such a man I will boast; but concerning myself I will not boast, except in the weaknesses.
For if I should desire to boast, I will not be a fool, for I will be speaking the truth. But I refrain, lest anyone should credit to me more than what he sees in me, or anyone hears of me,
and the surpassingness of the revelations. Therefore, that I should not become conceited, a thorn in my flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan, that he might buffet me, so that I should not become conceited.
Three times I begged the Lord for this, that it might depart from me.
And He said to me, “My grace suffices you, for the power is perfected in weakness.” Therefore will I boast rather most gladly in my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, and difficulties for Christ; for when I might be weak, then I am strong.
I have become a fool; you compelled me. For I ought to have been commended by you, for in no way was I inferior to those “most eminent apostles,” even though I am nothing.
For the signs of the apostle were performed among you in all perseverance, and in signs, and wonders, and miracles.
For in what is it that you were inferior beyond the rest of the churches, except that I myself did not burden you? Forgive me this wrong!
Behold, this third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not burden you. For I do not seek what is yours, but you. For the children ought not to treasure up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
Now I will spend most gladly, and will be utterly spent, for your souls. If loving you more abundantly, am I loved less?
But be it so, I did not burden you; but being crafty, I caught you by trickery.
By any of whom I have sent to you, did I exploit you by him?
I urged Titus to go, and sent with him our brother. Did Titus exploit you? Did we not walk in the same spirit? Not in the same steps?
Have you been thinking all along that we have been making a defense to you? We speak in Christ before God, but all things, beloved, for your edification.
For I fear lest perhaps having come, I may not find you such as I wish, and I might be found by you such as you do not wish; lest perhaps there may be quarreling, jealousy, anger, contentions, slander, gossip, conceit, disorder;
lest of my having come again, my God should humble me as to you, and I should mourn over many of those having before sinned and not having repented of the impurity, and sexual immorality, and sensuality that they have practiced.
This third time I am coming to you. “In the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter will be established.”
I have warned as being present the second time, and being absent now; and I warn those having sinned before and all the rest that, if I come to the same again, I will not spare anyone,
since you seek proof of Christ speaking in me, who is not weak toward you but is powerful among you.
For indeed He was crucified in weakness, yet He lives by God’s power. For we also are weak in Him, but we will live with Him by God’s power toward you.
Examine yourselves whether you are in the faith; test yourselves. Or do you not recognize yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you are unapproved?
And I hope that you will realize that we are not unapproved.
Now I pray to God for you to do nothing wrong. Not that we might appear approved, but that you may do what is right, though we might appear as unapproved.
For we have no power against the truth, but for the truth.
For we rejoice when we might be weak, but you might be strong. But this also we pray: for your perfection.
Therefore I write these things being absent, so that being present I should not treat you with severity according to the authority that the Lord has given me for building up and not for tearing down.
Finally, brothers, rejoice! Be perfected, be exhorted, be of the same mind, be at peace. And the God of love and peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the saints greet you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with all of you.
Paul, an apostle—not from men, nor through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, the One having raised Him out from the dead—
and all the brothers with me, To the churches of Galatia:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,
the One having given Himself for our sins, so that He might deliver us out of the evil age having come presently, according to the will our God and Father,
to whom be the glory to the ages of the ages. Amen.
I am amazed that so quickly you are deserting from the One having called you in the grace of Christ to another gospel,
which is not another, except there are some who are troubling you and are desiring to pervert the gospel of Christ.
But even if we or an angel out of heaven should preach a gospel to you contrary to what we proclaimed to you, let him be accursed!
As we have said before, even now I say again: If anyone is preaching a gospel to you contrary to what you received, let him be accursed!
For presently do I seek approval of men, or God? Or do I seek to please men? For if I were still pleasing men, I would not be a servant of Christ.
For I make known to you, brothers, the gospel having been preached by me, that it is not according to man.
For I neither received it from man, nor was I taught it, but by a revelation of Jesus Christ.
For you have heard of my former way of life in Judaism, that beyond exceeding measure I was persecuting the church of God and was destroying it.
And I was advancing in Judaism beyond many contemporaries among my people, being more abundantly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
But when God, the One having selected me from my mother’s womb and having called me by His grace, was pleased
to reveal His Son in me so that I might preach Him among the Gentiles, I consulted not immediately with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to the apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia and returned again to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Cephas, and I remained with him fifteen days.
But I saw none of the other apostles, only James, the Lord’s brother.
Now in what I write to you, behold, before God, I do not lie.
Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
And I was by face unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
But they were only hearing that “the one formerly persecuting us now is preaching the faith which once he was destroying.”
And they were glorifying God in me.
Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, having taken with me Titus also.
Now I went up according to a revelation and set before them the gospel that I proclaim among the Gentiles; but apart individually to those esteemed, lest hardly I might be running or have run in vain.
But not even Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised,
even because of the false brothers brought in secretly, who came in by stealth to spy out our freedom which we have in Christ Jesus that they will enslave us,
to whom we did not yield in subjection for even an hour, so that truth of the gospel would be preserved with you.
Now of those esteemed to be something, whatsoever they were formerly makes no difference to me. God does not accept the person of a man—for the esteemed added nothing to me.
But on the contrary, having seen that I have been entrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision just as Peter of the circumcision—
for the One having worked in Peter for apostleship of the circumcision, did also in me toward the Gentiles—
and having recognized the grace having been given to me, James and Cephas and John, those esteemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should go to the Gentiles, but they to the circumcision,
only that we should be mindful of the poor, also the same thing that I was eager to do.
But when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face because he stood condemned.
For before certain ones came from James, he had been eating with the Gentiles. But when they came, he was drawing back and was separating himself, being afraid of those of the circumcision.
And also the rest of the Jews acted hypocritically with him, so that, by their hypocrisy, even Barnabas was carried away.
But when I saw that they are not walking in line according to the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter before all, “If you being a Jew live like a Gentile, and not like a Jew, why do you compel the Gentiles to Judaize?
We Jews by birth and not ‘sinners’ of the Gentiles,
nevertheless knowing that a man is not justified by works of law, except through faith from Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith from Christ, and not by works of the Law, because by works of the Law not any flesh will be justified.
But if seeking to be justified in Christ, we ourselves also have been found sinners, is Christ then a minister of sin? Never may it be!
For if I build again these things that I had torn down, I prove myself a transgressor.
For through the Law I died to the Law that I might live to God.
I have been crucified with Christ, and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. And that which I now live in the flesh, I live through faith from the Son of God, the One having loved me and having given up Himself for me.
I do not set aside the grace of God. For if righteousness is through the Law, then Christ died for naught.”
O foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as having been crucified?
I wish only to learn this from you: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the Law or by hearing of faith?
Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are you now being perfected in the flesh?
Did you suffer so many things in vain, if indeed also in vain?
Therefore, the One supplying to you the Spirit and working miracles among you, is it out of works of the Law, or out of hearing of faith?
So also, “Abraham believed God and it was reckoned to him as righteousness.”
Know then that those of faith, these are sons of Abraham.
And the Scripture, having foreseen that God justifies the Gentiles by faith, foretold the gospel to Abraham: “All the nations will be blessed in you.”
So then, those of faith are blessed along with the believing Abraham.
For as many as are of works of the Law are under a curse, for it has been written: “Cursed is everyone who does not continue all things having been written in the book of the Law, to do them.”
Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law, because “The righteous will live by faith.”
But the Law is not of faith. Rather, “The one having done these things will live by them.”
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, having become a curse for us—for it has been written: “Cursed is everyone hanging on a tree”—
so that the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that through faith we might receive the promise of the Spirit.
Brothers, I am speaking according to man. No one sets aside or adds thereto a covenant even of man, having been ratified.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. It does not say “and to seeds” as of many but “and to your seed” as of One, who is Christ.
Now I say this: The Law, having come four hundred and thirty years afterward, does not annul the covenant having been confirmed beforehand by God, so as to nullify the promise.
For if the inheritance is by the Law, it is no longer by a promise. But God has granted it to Abraham through a promise.
Why then the Law? It was added on account of transgressions, until the seed to whom promise has been made should have come, having been ordained through angels in the hand of a mediator.
However, a mediator is not of one; but God is one.
Is the Law therefore contrary to the promises of God? Never may it be! For if a law had been given being able to impart life, then righteousness indeed would have emerged from out of the Law.
But the Scripture imprisoned all things under sin, so that by faith from Jesus Christ, the promise might be given to those believing.
Now before faith came, we were held in custody under the Law, having been locked up until the faith being about to be revealed,
so that the Law has become our trainer unto Christ, so that we might be justified by faith.
And faith having come, we are no longer under a trainer.
For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male and female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
Now if you are of Christ, then you are Abraham’s seed, heirs according to the promise.
Now I say, for as long a time as the heir is a child, he differs not from a slave, though being owner of everything.
Instead, he is under guardians and trustees until the time appointed by his father.
So also, we when we were children, were held in bondage under the principles of the world.
But when the fullness of the time had come, God sent forth His Son, having been born of a woman, having been born under the Law,
that He might redeem those under the Law, so that we might receive the divine adoption as sons.
And because you are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying out, “Abba, Father!”
So you are no longer a slave but a son; and if a son, also an heir through God.
But at that time indeed, not knowing God, you were enslaved to those by nature not being gods.
But now, having known God, but rather having been known by God, how do you turn again to the weak and destitute principles, to which you desire to be enslaved again anew?
You observe days and months and seasons and years.
I fear for you, lest perhaps I have toiled for you in vain.
I implore you, brothers, become as I am, because I also have become as you. You have wronged me in nothing.
Now you know that in weakness of the flesh I proclaimed the gospel the first time to you.
And of your test in my flesh, you did not despise me nor reject me with contempt, but you received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
What has become then of your blessedness? For I bear witness to you that, if possible, having gouged out your eyes, you would have given them to me.
So have I become your enemy speaking truth to you?
They zealously seek you, not rightly. But they desire to isolate you from us, so that you might be zealous after them.
Now it is good to be zealous in a right thing, at all times and not only in my being present with you.
My children, of whom I travail again until that Christ shall have been formed in you,
I was wishing indeed to be present with you presently and to change my tone, because I am perplexed as to you.
Tell me, those wishing to be under the Law, do you do not listen to the Law?
For it has been written that Abraham had two sons, one of the slave woman and one of the free.
But indeed, the one of the slave woman has been born according to flesh, but the one of the free, through the promise,
which things are allegorized, for these are two covenants: one indeed from Mount Sinai, begetting unto slavery, which is Hagar.
Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children.
But the Jerusalem above is free, who is our mother.
For it has been written: “Rejoice O barren woman, the one not bearing; break forth and call aloud, the one not travailing; because many more are the children of the desolate woman than of her having the husband.”
Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise.
But just as at that time the one having been born according to flesh was persecuting the one born according to Spirit, so also it is now.
But what does the Scripture say? “Cast out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman will never inherit along with the son of the free.”
So then, brothers, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free.
In freedom Christ has set us free. Stand firm, therefore and do not be entangled again in a yoke of slavery!
Behold, I Paul say to you that if you shall become circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing.
Now again I testify to every man receiving circumcision that he is a debtor to keep the whole Law.
Whoever are being justified in the Law, you are severed from Christ; you have fallen away from grace.
For through the Spirit, by faith, we eagerly await the hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any power, but only faith working through love.
You were running well. Who hindered you, not to obey the truth?
This persuasion is not of the One calling you.
A little leaven leavens the whole lump.
I am confident as to you in the Lord that you will have no other mind. But the one troubling you will bear the judgment, whoever he might be.
Now brothers, if I still proclaim circumcision, why still am I persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
I wish those upsetting you also will emasculate themselves!
For you brothers were called to freedom, but not the freedom for an opportunity to the flesh. Rather, serve one another through love.
For the entire Law is fulfilled in in this one word: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”
But if you bite and devour one another, take heed, lest you might be consumed by one another.
Now I say, walk by the Spirit, and you should not gratify the desires of the flesh.
For the flesh desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. For these are opposed to one another in order that you should not do those things you might wish.
But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the Law.
Now the works of the flesh are evident, which are sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality,
idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, contentions, dissensions, factions,
envyings, drunkennesses, carousing, and things like these, as to which I forewarn you, even as I warned before, that those doing such things will not inherit God’s kingdom.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
gentleness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
Now those of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
If we live by the Spirit, we should also walk by the Spirit.
We should not become boastful, provoking one another, envying one another.
Brothers, even if a man should be caught in some trespass, you the spiritual ones restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness, considering yourself, lest you also be tempted.
Bear one another’s burdens and thus you will fulfill the law of Christ.
For if anyone thinks himself to be something being nothing, he deceives himself.
But let each test his own work, and then he will have the ground of boasting in himself alone, and not in another.
For each shall bear his own load.
Now let the one being taught in the word share in all good things with the one teaching.
Do not be misled: God is not mocked. For whatever a man might sow, that also he will reap.
For the one sowing to his own flesh, from the flesh will reap decay. But the one sowing to the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life.
And we should not grow weary in well doing. For in due time we will reap a harvest, not giving up.
So then, as we have occasion, we should work good toward all, and especially toward those of the household of the faith.
See the large letters I have written to you with my own hand!
As many as desire to have a fair appearance in the flesh, these compel you to be circumcised, only that they might not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
For not even those being circumcised keep the Law themselves, but they desire you to be circumcised so that they may boast in your flesh.
But for me, may it be never to boast, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world.
For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is anything; instead, a new creation.
And as many as those who will walk by this rule, peace and mercy be upon them, and upon the Israel of God.
Henceforth, let no one give to me troubles, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints being in Ephesus, and faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the One having blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly realms,
just as He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world for us to be holy and blameless before Him, in love
having predestined us for divine adoption as sons to Himself through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of His will,
to the praise of the glory of His grace, which He has freely given us in the Beloved One,
in whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of trespasses, according to the riches of His grace
which He lavished upon us in all wisdom and understanding,
having made known to us the mystery of His will according to His pleasure, which He purposed in Him
for the administration of the fullness of the times, to bring together all things in Christ—the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth—
in Him, in whom also we have obtained an inheritance, having been predestined according to the purpose of the One working all things according to the counsel of His will
for us, the ones having first trusted in Christ, to be to the praise of His glory,
in whom you also, having heard the word of truth, the gospel your of salvation, in whom also having believed you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
who is the guarantee of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession, to the praise of His glory.
Because of this, I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus among you, and the love toward all the saints,
do not cease giving thanks for you, making mention in my prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him,
the eyes your of heart being enlightened, in order for you to know what is the hope of His calling, what are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints,
and what is the surpassing greatness of His power toward us believing according to the working of the power of His might,
which He worked in Christ, having raised Him out from the dead, and having set Him at His right hand in the heavenly realms,
above every principality and authority and power and dominion, and every name being named, not only in this age, but also in the one coming.
And He put all things under His feet and gave Him to be head over all things to the church,
which is His body, the fullness of the One filling all in all.
And you, being dead in your trespasses and sins—
in which once you walked according to the age of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit now working in the sons of disobedience,
among whom we all also once lived in the desires of our flesh, doing the things willed of the flesh and of its thoughts; and we were by nature children of wrath even as the rest.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of His great love with which He loved us,
made us alive with Christ even we being dead in trespasses—by grace you are saved—
and He raised us up together and seated us together in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,
in order that in the coming ages He might show the surpassing riches of His grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace you are saved through faith, and this not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,
not as a result of works, so that no one may boast.
For we are His workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
Therefore remember that formerly you—the Gentiles in the flesh, the ones being called the uncircumcision by that being called the circumcision, made by hands in the flesh—
that at that time you were separate from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, not having hope and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus you, the ones once being far off, have become near by the blood of Christ.
For He Himself is our peace, having made both one and having broken down the barrier of the partition of hostility,
having annulled in His flesh the law of commandments in ordinances, so that He might create in Himself the two into one new man, making peace,
and He might reconcile both to God in one body through the cross, by it having slain the hostility.
And having come, He proclaimed the gospel: peace to you, the ones far off, and peace to those near.
For through Him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit.
So then, you are no longer strangers and aliens, but are fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God,
having been built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being the cornerstone,
in whom the whole building, being fitted together, is increasing into a holy temple in the Lord,
in whom you also are being built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.
For reason of this, I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles...
Surely you have heard of the administration of God’s grace, having been given to me toward you,
that He made known to me the mystery by revelation, just as I have written before in brief,
which, by reading, you are able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
which was not made known to the sons of men in other generations as now it has been revealed in the Spirit to His holy apostles and prophets,
that the Gentiles are joint-heirs, and a joint-body, and joint-partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus, through the gospel,
of which I became servant according to the gift of God’s grace, having been given to me according to the working of His power.
To me, the very least of all saints, was given this grace: to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ
and to enlighten all what is the administration of the mystery having been hidden from the ages in God, the One having created all things,
so that now through the church the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms,
according to the purpose of the ages, which He accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have boldness and access in confidence, by faith in Him.
Therefore I implore you not to lose heart at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.
... for reason of this I bow my knees to the Father,
from whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named,
that He might give you, according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with power by His Spirit in the inner man,
for Christ to dwell in your hearts through faith, being rooted and being founded in love,
so that you may be fully able, with all the saints, to comprehend what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
and to know the love of Christ surpassing knowledge, so that you may be filled unto all the fullness of God.
Now to the One being able to do exceedingly above all things that we ask or think, according to the power working in us,
to Him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all the generations of the age of the ages. Amen.
Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you to walk worthily of the calling to which you were called,
with all humility and gentleness; with patience bearing with one another in love;
being diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace;
one body and one Spirit, just as also you were called into one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
Now to each one of us grace has been given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Therefore it says: “Having ascended on high, He led captive captivity, and gave gifts to men.”
Now what is “He ascended,” except that He also descended into the lower regions of the earth?
The One having descended is also the same one having ascended above all the heavens, so that He might fill all things.
And He gave some indeed to be apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers,
toward the perfecting of the saints for the work of ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ,
until we all may attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a complete man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
so that no longer we might be infants, being tossed by waves and being carried about by every wind of teaching in the cunning, in the craftiness of men with a view to the scheming of deceit.
But speaking the truth in love, we should grow up in all things into Him who is the head, Christ,
from whom the whole body, being joined together and being held together by every ligament of its supply, according to the working in the measure of each individual part, the increase of the body makes for itself, to the building up of itself in love.
This therefore I say and testify in the Lord: You are no longer to walk as also the Gentiles are walking, in the futility of their mind,
being darkened in the understanding, being alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance being in them on account of the hardness of their heart,
who, having cast off all feeling, have given themselves up to sensuality for the working of all impurity, with greediness for more.
But you have not learned Christ this way,
if indeed you have heard Him and have been taught in Him just as the truth is in Jesus.
You are to have put off, concerning the former way of life, the old man, which is being corrupted according to its desires of deceit,
and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and to have put on the new man, having been created according to God in righteousness and holiness of truth.
Therefore having put off falsehood, let each one speak truth with his neighbor, because we are members of one another.
“Be angry, and yet do not sin.” Let not the sun set upon your anger,
neither give opportunity to the devil.
The one stealing, let him steal no longer, but rather let him toil, working with the own hands what is good, so that he may have something to impart to the one having need.
Do not let any unwholesome word go forth out of your mouth, but only good, for edification of the need, so that it may give grace to those hearing.
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and rage, and anger, and clamor, and slander, be removed from you, along with all malice.
And be kind to one another, tender-hearted, forgiving each other, as also in Christ God forgave you.
Be imitators of God, therefore, as beloved children,
and walk in love, just as Christ also loved us and gave Himself up for us as an offering and a sacrifice to God, into an aroma of a sweet smell.
But let sexual immorality and all impurity or covetousness not even be named among you, as also is proper to saints,
and filthiness, and foolish talking, or crude joking, which are not fitting, but rather thanksgiving.
For this you know, realizing that any fornicator, or unclean person, or covetous man, who is an idolater, has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience.
Therefore do not be partakers with them.
For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light—
for the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth—
discerning what is well-pleasing to the Lord.
And do not have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even expose them.
For it is shameful even to mention the things being done by them in secret.
But everything being exposed by the light is made visible, for everything becoming visible is light.
Therefore it says: “Awake you, the one sleeping, and rise up out from the dead, and Christ will shine upon you.”
Therefore carefully take heed how you walk, not as unwise but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Because of this, do not be foolish, but understand what is the Lord’s will,
and not to be drunk with wine in which is debauchery. Instead be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to each other in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord,
giving thanks at all times for all things in the name our Lord Jesus Christ to the God and Father.
Be submitting yourselves to one another in reverence of Christ:
wives, to the own husbands as to the Lord;
for the husband is head of the wife as also Christ is the head of the church, He Himself Savior of the body.
But even as the church is subjected to Christ, so also wives to the own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love the wives just as Christ also loved the church and gave Himself up for her,
so that He might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water by the word,
so that He might present to Himself the church in glory, not having spot or wrinkle or any of the such things, but that it would be holy and blameless.
So also husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. The one loving his wife loves himself.
For no one at any time hated his flesh. But he nourishes and cherishes it just as Christ also does the church.
For we are members of His body.
“Because of this, a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will be into one flesh.”
This mystery is great; but I speak as to Christ and as to the church.
However, you also, every individual, let each so love his wife as himself; and the wife, that she may respect the husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
“Honor your Father and mother,” which is the first commandment with a promise,
“that it may be well with you and you will be long-lived upon the earth.”
And fathers, do not provoke your children, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord.
Slaves, obey the earthly masters with fear and trembling, in sincerity of your heart as to Christ,
not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart,
rendering service with good will as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that each one, whatever good he might have done, this he will receive back from the Lord, whether he is slave or free.
And masters do the same things toward them, giving up threatening, knowing that also their master and yours is in the heavens, and there is no partiality with Him.
Henceforth be empowered in the Lord and in the strength of His might.
Put on the complete armor of God, for you to be able to stand against the schemes of the devil,
because to us the wrestling is not against blood and flesh, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
Because of this, take up the complete armor of God, so that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all things, to stand.
Stand therefore, having girded your loins with truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
and having shod the feet with the readiness of the gospel of peace;
besides all, having taken up the shield of faith with which you will be able to quench all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
through all prayer and supplication, praying in the Spirit in every season and unto this very thing, watching with all perseverance and supplication for all saints,
and also for me, that in the opening of my mouth, divine utterance may be given to me to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel,
for which I am an ambassador in a chain, that in it I may be bold, as it behooves me to speak.
And that you also may know the things concerning me, what I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make known to you all things,
whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that you may know the things concerning us, and he may encourage your hearts.
Peace to the brothers and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be with all those loving our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptibility.
Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, To all the saints in Christ Jesus being in Philippi, with the overseers and deacons:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you,
always making the supplication with joy in my every supplication for all of you,
for your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
being persuaded of this very thing, that the One having begun a good work in you will complete it until the day of Christ Jesus.
Accordingly, it is right for me to feel this about all of you, since I have you in the heart. Both in my chains and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel, you all are fellow partakers of grace with me.
For God is my witness how I long after you all in the affection of Christ Jesus.
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment,
for you to approve the things being excellent, so that you may be pure and blameless unto the day of Christ,
being filled with the fruit of righteousness that is through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
Now I want you to know brothers, that the things concerning me really have turned out to the advancement of the gospel,
so as for my chains in Christ to have become clearly known in all the palace guard and to all the rest;
and most of the brothers, trusting in the Lord by my chains, to dare more abundantly to speak fearlessly the word.
For some, even from envy and strife, are proclaiming Christ, but some also from goodwill—
the ones indeed out of love, knowing that I am appointed for defense of the gospel;
but the others are proclaiming Christ out of selfish ambition, not purely, supposing to add tribulation to my chains.
What then? Only that in every way, whether in pretext or in truth, Christ is proclaimed. And in this I rejoice. Yes, and I will rejoice,
for I know that through your prayer and the provision of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, this will turn out for me to deliverance,
according to my earnest expectation and hope that I will be ashamed in nothing, but in all boldness also now as always, Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death.
For to me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
But if I am to live in flesh, this is the fruit of labor for me. And what shall I choose? I do not know.
But I am pressed between the two, having the desire to depart and to be with Christ, indeed very much better,
but to remain in the flesh is more necessary for your sake.
And having been persuaded of this, I know that I will remain and will continue with all of you for your progress and joy of the faith,
so that through my coming to you again your boasting in me may abound to Christ Jesus.
Only conduct yourselves worthily of the gospel of Christ, so that, whether having come and having seen you, or being absent, I might hear the things concerning you, that you are standing firm in one spirit, striving together with one mind for the faith of the gospel,
and not being frightened in anything by those opposing you, which is a demonstration of destruction to them, but of salvation to you—and this from God.
For it has been granted to you concerning Christ, not only to believe in Him but also to suffer concerning Him,
having the same conflict such as you saw in me and now hear of in me.
Therefore if there is any encouragement in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any affections and compassions,
fulfill my joy so that you may be of the same mind, having the same love, united in soul, minding the same thing,
nothing according to self-interest or according to vain conceit, but in humility be esteeming one another surpassing themselves,
each considering not the things of themselves, but each also the things of others.
Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus:
Who, existing in the form of God, did not consider to be equal with God something to be grasped,
but emptied Himself, having taken the form of a servant, having been made in the likeness of men.
And having been found in appearance as a man He humbled Himself, having become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Therefore God also highly exalted Him, and granted to Him the name above every name,
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in the heavens and on earth and under the earth,
and every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Therefore my beloved, just as always you have obeyed, not only as in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For God is the One working in you both to will and to work according to His good pleasure.
Do all things without murmurings and disputings,
so that you may be blameless and innocent, children of God unblemished in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world,
holding forth the word of life unto a boast to me in the day of Christ that I did not run in vain nor toil in vain.
But even if I am being poured out as a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all.
And likewise you also be glad and rejoice with me.
But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be encouraged, having known the things concerning you.
For I have no one like-minded, who genuinely will care for the things relative to you.
For those all are seeking the things of themselves, not the things of Jesus Christ.
But you know his proven worth, that as a child with a father he has served with me in the gospel.
Therefore indeed I hope to send him immediately, when I shall have seen the things concerning me.
And I am persuaded in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.
Now I esteemed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your messenger and minister to my need,
since he was longing after you all and being deeply distressed because you heard that he was ill.
And indeed he was sick, nearly unto death. But God had mercy on him, and not on him alone but also on me, that I should not have sorrow upon sorrow.
Therefore I have sent him all the more eagerly, that having seen him again, you may rejoice, and I might be less anxious.
Therefore, receive him in the Lord with all joy, and hold such in honor,
because for the sake of the work of Christ he came near unto death, having disregarded his life so that he might fill up your deficit of service toward me.
Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you indeed is not troublesome to me, and is safe for you.
Beware of the dogs! Beware of the evil workers! Beware of the false circumcision!
For we are the circumcision, those worshiping in the Spirit of God, and glorying in Christ Jesus, and not trusting in the flesh—
though I have confidence even in the flesh. If any other thinks to trust in the flesh, I more:
circumcision on the eighth day; of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin; a Hebrew of Hebrews; according to the Law, a Pharisee;
according to zeal, persecuting the church; according to righteousness in the Law, having become faultless.
But whatever things were gain to me, these I have esteemed loss because of Christ.
But indeed, therefore, I also count all things to be loss because of the excelling knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, because of whom I have lost all things, and esteem them rubbish, that I may gain Christ
and be found in Him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through faith from Christ, the righteousness of God on the basis of faith,
to know Him and the power of His resurrection and the fellowship of His sufferings, being conformed to His death,
if, by any means, I may attain to the resurrection from out of dead.
Not that already I have obtained it or already have been perfected, but I am pursuing, if also I may lay hold of that for which also I was laid hold of by Christ Jesus.
Brothers, I do not consider myself to have taken hold of it. But one thing indeed: Forgetting the things behind and reaching forward to the things ahead,
I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Therefore as many as are mature should be of this mind. And if you are minded in anything differently, even this God will reveal to you.
Nevertheless, to that which we have attained, we are to walk by the same.
Be imitators together of me brothers, and consider those walking thus, as you have us for a pattern.
For many are walking—of whom I have told you often and now I say even weeping—as enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction, whose God is the belly and glory is in their shame, those minding earthly things.
For our citizenship exists in the heavens, from whence also we are awaiting a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform our body of humiliation, conformed to the body of His glory, according to the working enabling Him even to subdue all things to Himself.
Therefore my brothers, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, in this way stand firm in the Lord, beloved.
I exhort Euodia and I exhort Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.
Yes, and I ask you, true yokefellow, help these women who labored together with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, rejoice!
Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is near.
Be anxious about nothing, but in everything, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.
And the peace of God, surpassing all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
Finally brothers, whatever is true, whatever is venerable, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if any excellence and if any praise—think on these things.
And what you have learned and have received and have heard and have seen in me, practice these things. And the God of peace will be with you.
But I rejoiced greatly in the Lord that now at last you have revived the caring for me, wherein also you were concerned, but you were lacking opportunity.
Not that I speak as to destitution, for I have learned to be content in that which I am.
I know also how to be brought low, and I know how to abound. In everything, and in all things, I have learned the secret also to be full and to hunger, also to abound and to be deficient.
I have strength for all things in the One strengthening me.
But you did well, having fellowship in my affliction.
And you Philippians also know that in the beginning of the gospel, when I came out from Macedonia, not one church had partnership with me with regard to the matter of giving and receiving, except you alone.
For even in Thessalonica, both once and twice, you sent for my needs.
Not that I seek after the gift, but I seek after the fruit abounding to your account.
But I have all things, and abound. I am full, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you, an odor of a sweet smell, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
And my God will fill up all your needs according to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus.
Now to our God and Father be the glory to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me greet you.
All the saints greet you, and especially those of the household of Caesar.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy the brother,
To the saints in Colossae and faithful brothers in Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.
We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying continually for you,
having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have toward all the saints,
because of the hope being laid up for you in the heavens, which you heard of before in the word of truth, the gospel,
the one being present unto you, just as also in all the world it is bearing fruit and increasing, just as also among you from the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth,
just as you learned from Epaphras, our beloved fellow bond-servant, who is a faithful servant of Christ on behalf of us,
the one also having made known to us your love in the Spirit.
Because of this also, we from the day we heard, do not cease praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of His will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding
to walk worthily of the Lord: pleasing in all, bringing forth fruit in every good work, and growing in the knowledge of God,
being strengthened with all power according to His glorious might, unto all endurance and patience with joy,
giving thanks to the Father, the One having qualified you for the share of the inheritance of the saints in light,
who has delivered us from the dominion of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of His beloved Son,
in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation,
because in Him were created all things in the heavens and upon the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones or lordships or rulers or authorities; all things have been created through Him and unto Him.
And He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together.
And He is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, firstborn out from the dead, so that He might be holding preeminence in all things,
because all the fullness was pleased to dwell in Him,
and by Him to reconcile all things to Himself, having made peace by the blood of His cross through Him, whether the things on the earth or the things in the heavens.
And you, being once alienated and hostile in mind, in the evil deeds,
but now He has reconciled in His body of flesh through death, to present you holy and unblemished and blameless before Him,
if indeed you continue in the faith, established and firm, and not being moved away from the hope of the gospel that you have heard, having been proclaimed in all creation under heaven, of which I Paul have become a minister.
Now I rejoice in the sufferings for you, and I am filling up in my flesh that which is lacking of the tribulations of Christ for His body, which is the church,
of which I became a minister according to the administration of God having been given me toward you, to complete the word of God,
the mystery having been hidden from the ages and from the generations, but now having been manifested to His saints,
to whom God has willed to make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory,
whom we preach, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that we may present every man perfect in Christ.
Unto this also I toil, striving according to His energy, working in me in power.
For I want you to know how great a struggle I am having for you, and those in Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face in the flesh,
that their hearts may be encouraged, having been knit together in love, and to all the riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the knowledge of the mystery of God, which is Christ,
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
I say this so that no one might delude you by persuasive speech.
Truly indeed, if I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in spirit, rejoicing and seeing your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
Therefore, just as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in Him,
having been rooted and being built up in Him, and being strengthened in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding with thanksgiving.
Take heed lest there will be anyone taking you captive through philosophy and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the principles of the world and not according to Christ.
For in Him all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily.
And you are complete in Him, who is the head of all rule and authority,
in whom also you were circumcised with the circumcision made without hands in the removal of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ,
having been buried with Him in baptism, in which also you were raised with Him through the faith of the working of God, the One having raised Him out from the dead.
And you being dead in the trespasses and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, He made alive together with Him, having forgiven us all our trespasses,
having blotted out the handwriting in the decrees against us, which was adverse to us. And He has taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the cross.
Having disarmed the rulers and the authorities, He made a show of them in public, having triumphed over them in it.
Therefore let no one judge you in regard to food, or in regard to drink, or in regard to a feast, or a New Moon, or Sabbaths,
which are a shadow the things coming. But the body is of Christ.
Let no one disqualify you, delighting in humility and the worship of the angels, detailing what he has seen, being puffed up vainly by his mind of the flesh,
and not holding fast to the head, from whom the whole body, being supplied and being knit together by the joints and ligaments, increases with the increase of God.
If you have died with Christ, away from the principles of the world, why as if living in the world do you submit to decrees:
“You should not handle! You should not taste! You should not touch!”?—
which are all unto decay with the use, according to the precepts and teachings of men,
which having indeed an appearance of wisdom in self-imposed worship and humility and harsh treatment of the body, are not of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.
If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God.
Set your minds on the things above, not the things on the earth.
For you have died, and your life has been hidden with Christ in God.
When Christ your life may be revealed, then you also will appear with Him in glory.
Therefore put to death the members which are upon the earth: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry,
because of which things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience,
in which you also once walked when you were living in them.
But now you also put off all these things: anger, rage, malice, slander, foul language out of your mouth.
Do not lie to one another, having put off the old man with his practices,
and having put on the new, the one being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one having created him,
where there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, slave, and free; but Christ is all and in all.
Therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on hearts of compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
bearing with each other and forgiving each other. If anyone should have a complaint against another, even as also the Lord has forgiven you, so also you.
And beyond all these, put on love, which is the bond of perfect unity.
And let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body. And be thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing each other in all wisdom, singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs with grace in your hearts to God.
And all, whatever you might do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him.
Wives, submit yourselves to the husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Husbands, love the wives and do not be harsh toward them.
Children, obey the parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.
Fathers, do not provoke your children lest they might become discouraged.
Slaves, obey the earthly masters in all things, not with eye-services as men-pleasers, but in sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord.
Whatever you might do, work from the soul, as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that you will receive from the Lord the reward of the inheritance. You serve the Lord Christ!
For the one doing wrong will be repaid for what he has done wrong; and there is no partiality.
Masters, give to the slaves that which is righteous and that which is equal, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Continue steadfastly in prayer, watching in it, with thanksgiving,
praying at the same time also for us, that God may open to us a door for the word, to declare the mystery of Christ, on account of which also I have been bound,
so that I should make it clear, as it behooves me to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those outside, redeeming the time.
Let your speech be always in grace, having been seasoned with salt, to know how it behooves you to answer each one.
All the things concerning me, Tychicus will make known to you, the beloved brother and faithful servant and fellow bond-servant in the Lord,
whom I sent to you for this very purpose, that you might know the things concerning us, and he may encourage your hearts,
with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will make known to you all things here.
Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, concerning whom you have received instructions—if he comes to you, welcome him—
and also Jesus called Justus, these being the only fellow workers for the kingdom of God among the circumcision, who have been a comfort to me.
Epaphras greets you, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, always struggling for you in the prayers, so that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of God.
For I bear witness to him that he has great concern for you and those in Laodicea and those in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, greets you, and also Demas.
Greet the brothers in Laodicea, and also Nympha and the church in her house.
And when the letter shall be read among you, cause that it may be read also in the church of the Laodiceans, and that you also may read the one from Laodicea.
And say to Archippus: “Take heed to the ministry that you have received in the Lord, that you may fulfill it.”
The greeting is in the own hand—Paul. Remember my chains. Grace be with you.
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace.
We give thanks to God always concerning all of you, making mention in our prayers,
remembering before our God and Father your work of faith and unceasing labor of love, and the endurance of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ,
knowing, brothers beloved by God, your election,
because our gospel came to you not in word only, but also in power and in the Holy Spirit, and with much full assurance, just as you know what we were among you on account of you.
And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much tribulation, with the joy of the Holy Spirit,
so as for you to became an example to all the believing ones in Macedonia and in Achaia.
For not only has the word of the Lord sounded forth from you in Macedonia and in Achaia, but in every place your faith toward God has gone abroad, so as for us to have no need to say anything.
For they themselves report concerning us what reception we had from you, and how you turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God,
and to await His Son from the heavens, whom He raised out from the dead—Jesus, the one delivering us from the coming wrath.
For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming to you has not been in vain.
But having previously suffered and having been mistreated in Philippi, just as you know, we had boldness in our God to speak to you the gospel of God amid much conflict.
For our exhortation was not of error, nor of impurity, nor in trickery;
but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, the One examining our hearts.
For never at any time were we with word of flattery, just as you know, nor with a pretext for greed—God is witness—
nor seeking glory from men, nor from you, nor from others, though having authority with weight to be, as apostles of Christ.
But we were gentle in your midst, as a nursing mother would cherish her own children.
So yearning over you, we were pleased to have imparted to you not only the gospel of God, but also our own lives, because you have become beloved to us.
For you remember, brothers, our labor and hardship: Working night and day in order not to burden any one of you, we proclaimed to you the gospel of God.
You are witnesses, and God, how holily and righteously and blamelessly we behaved toward you, those believing,
just as you know how each one of you, as a father his own children,
we were exhorting and comforting you and charging unto you to walk worthily of God, who calls you into His kingdom and glory.
And because of this, we also give thanks to God unceasingly that, having received the word of God by your hearing from us, you accepted not the word of men, but even as truly it is, the word of God, which also works in you who believe.
For you became imitators, brothers, of the churches of God in Judea being in Christ Jesus. For the same as them, you also suffered from the own countrymen as they also did from the Jews,
who having killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and having driven us out, and not pleasing God, are also set against all men,
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, so as always to fill up their sins. Now the wrath has come upon them to the utmost.
But we, having been bereaved of you, brothers, for the time of an hour—in face, not in heart—were more abundantly eager with great desire to see your face.
Therefore we wanted to come to you—indeed I Paul, both once and twice—and Satan hindered us.
For who is our hope or joy or crown of boasting? Or are not even you, before our Lord Jesus at His coming?
For you are our glory and joy.
Therefore, enduring no longer, we thought it best to be left in Athens alone,
and we sent Timothy, our brother and fellow worker of God in the gospel of Christ, in order to strengthen and to encourage you concerning your faith,
that no one be moved in these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we are destined for this.
And indeed, when we were with you, we were telling you beforehand that we are about to suffer affliction, just as also it came to pass, and you know.
Because of this I also, enduring no longer, sent in order to know your faith, lest somehow the one tempting had tempted you, and our labor would be in vain.
But presently, Timothy having come to us from you and having brought good news to us of your faith and love, and that always you have a good remembrance of us, longing to see us just as also we you,
because of this, brothers, we were encouraged as to you in all our distress and tribulation, through your faith.
For now we live, if you are standing firm in the Lord.
For what thanksgiving are we able to give to God concerning you in return for all the joy that we rejoice before our God because of you,
night and day imploring exceedingly for us to see your face and to supply the things lacking of you in faith?
Now may our God and Father Himself, and our Lord Jesus, direct our way to you.
And may the Lord make you to increase and to abound in love toward one another, and toward all, just as also we toward you,
in order to strengthen your hearts, blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all His saints. Amen.
Finally then, brothers, we implore and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that just as you have received from us in what manner it behooves you to walk and to please God, just as even you walk now, so you should abound more.
For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, your sanctification: You are to abstain from sexual immorality;
each of you to know how to win mastery over his own vessel in holiness and honor,
not in the passion of lust, as also the Gentiles, not knowing God;
not to go beyond and to overreach his brother in the matter, because the Lord is avenging concerning all these things, just as also we told you before and thoroughly warned.
For God has not called us to impurity, but into holiness.
So then, the one rejecting this does not disregard man but God, the One also giving His Holy Spirit to you.
Now concerning brotherly love, you have no need for me to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God in order to love one another.
And indeed you are doing this toward all the brothers, the ones in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, to abound more and more,
and to strive earnestly to live quietly and to attend to your own matters, and to work with your own hands, just as we commanded you,
so that you may walk properly toward those outside, and may have need of no one.
But we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, concerning those having fallen asleep, so that you should not be grieved, just as also the rest, those having no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so, through Jesus, God will bring with Him those having fallen asleep.
For this we declare to you in the word of the Lord, that we the living, remaining unto the coming of the Lord, shall not precede those having fallen asleep,
because the Lord Himself will descend from heaven with a loud command, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ will rise first.
Then we, the living remaining, will be caught away together with them in the clouds for the meeting of the Lord in the air; and so we will be always with the Lord.
Therefore encourage one another with these words.
Now concerning the times and the seasons, brothers, you have no need to be written to you.
For you yourselves fully know that the day of the Lord comes in this manner, as a thief by night.
For when they might say, “Peace and security,” then suddenly destruction comes upon them, as the labor pains to her having in womb; and they shall not escape.
But you, brothers, are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you like a thief.
For you are all sons of light and sons of day; we are not of night nor of darkness.
So then we should not sleep as the others, but we should watch and we should be sober.
For those sleeping, sleep by night; and those becoming drunk, get drunk by night.
But we being of the day should be sober, having put on the breastplate of faith and love, and the helmet, the hope of salvation,
because God has not destined us for wrath, but for obtaining salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
the One having died for us, so that whether we might watch or we might sleep, we may live together with Him.
Therefore encourage one another and build up one another, just as also you are doing.
But we implore you, brothers, to appreciate those toiling among you, and taking the lead over you in the Lord, and admonishing you,
and to esteem them exceedingly in love, because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.
And we exhort you, brothers, to admonish the unruly, encourage the fainthearted, help the weak, be patient toward all.
See that no one has repaid to anyone evil for evil, but always pursue the good also toward one another and toward all.
Rejoice always.
Pray unceasingly.
Give thanks in everything, for this is the will of God toward you in Christ Jesus.
Do not quench the Spirit.
Do not despise prophecies,
but test all things. Hold fast to the good.
Abstain from every form of evil.
Now may the God of peace Himself sanctify you completely, and may your spirit and soul and body be preserved, entirely blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The One calling you is faithful, who also will do it.
Brothers, pray also for us.
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
I adjure you by the Lord, this letter to be read to all the brothers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We ought to thank God always concerning you, brothers, just as it is fitting, because your faith is increasing exceedingly, and the love of each one of you all to one another is abounding,
so as for us ourselves to boast in you in the churches of God about your endurance and faith in all your persecutions, and in the tribulations that you are bearing.
This is a plain token of the righteous judgment of God, for you to be accounted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also you suffer.
For indeed it is righteous with God to repay those oppressing you with affliction,
and to you being oppressed, repose with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with His mighty angels,
in a fire of flame, inflicting vengeance on those not knowing God and on those not obeying the gospel of our Lord Jesus,
who will suffer the penalty of eternal destruction away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of His power,
when in that day He shall come to be glorified in His saints, and to be marveled at among all those having believed because our testimony to you was believed,
for which also we pray always for you, that He may count you worthy of the calling of our God, and He may fulfill every good pleasure of goodness and work of faith with power,
so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in Him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now we implore you, brothers, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together unto Him,
for you not quickly to be shaken in mind, nor to be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as if by us, as that day of the Lord is present.
No one should deceive you in any way, because it is not until the apostasy shall have come first, and the man of lawlessness shall have been revealed—the son of destruction,
the one opposing and exalting himself above every so-called god or object of worship—so as for him to sit down in the temple of God, setting forth that he himself is God.
Do you not remember that, being yet with you, I was saying these things to you?
And now you know that which is restraining for his being revealed in his time.
For the mystery of lawlessness is working already; there is only the one at present restraining it, until he might be gone out of the midst.
And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will consume with the breath of His mouth and will annul by the appearing of His coming,
whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in every power, and in signs, and in wonders of falsehood,
and in every deception of wickedness unto those perishing, in return for which they did not receive the love of the truth in order for them to be saved.
And because of this, God will send to them a working of delusion, for them to believe what is false,
in order that all those not having believed the truth but having delighted in unrighteousness should be judged.
But we ought to give thanks to God always concerning you, brothers beloved by the Lord, that God has chosen you from the beginning unto salvation in the sanctification of the Spirit, and by faith of the truth;
to this also He called you through our gospel to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brothers, stand firm and hold fast to the traditions that you were taught, whether by word, or by letter from us.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and God our Father, the One having loved us and having given us eternal comfort and good hope by grace,
may He encourage your hearts and may He strengthen them in every good work and word.
Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may spread quickly and may be glorified, just as also with you,
and that we may be delivered from perverse and evil men; for not all are of the faith.
But the Lord is faithful, who will strengthen you and will keep you from evil.
And we are persuaded in the Lord as to you, that both you are doing and you will do the things that we command.
And may the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God and into the steadfastness of Christ.
Now we warn you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you are to withdraw from every brother walking idly and not according to the tradition that you received from us.
For you yourselves know how it behooves you to imitate us, because we were not idle among you,
nor did we eat bread from anyone without payment, but in labor and toil, working night and day in order not to be burdensome to any of you,
not that we do not have the right, but that we may offer ourselves as an example to you for you to imitate us.
For even when we were with you, we were commanding you this, that “if anyone is not willing to work, neither let him eat.”
For we hear some among you are walking idly, not working at all, but being busybodies.
Now we command and exhort to such by our Lord Jesus Christ so that, working with quietness, they may eat their own bread.
Now you, brothers, shall not grow weary in well-doing.
And if anyone does not obey our instruction through the letter, take note of this man, not to mix with him, so that he may be ashamed.
And yet do not esteem him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace Himself give you peace through all, in every way. The Lord be with all of you.
The greeting is in my own hand—Paul, which is my sign in every letter. In this manner I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, according to the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,
To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Just as I urged you to remain in Ephesus when I was going to Macedonia, so that you might warn certain men not to teach other doctrines,
nor to give heed to myths and endless genealogies, which bring speculations rather than God’s stewardship, which is in faith.
Now the goal of our instruction is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and a sincere faith,
from which some, having missed the mark, have turned aside to meaningless discourse,
desiring to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they are saying nor that about which they confidently assert.
Now we know that the Law is good, if one uses it lawfully,
knowing this, that law is not enacted for a righteous one, but for the lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly and sinful, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for slayers of man,
for the sexually immoral, homosexuals, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and if anything other is opposed to being sound in the teaching,
according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, with which I have been entrusted.
I have thankfulness for the One having strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord, that He esteemed me faithful, having appointed me to service,
being formerly a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and insolent; but I was shown mercy, because I did it in unbelief, being ignorant.
And the grace of our Lord surpassingly increased with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
Trustworthy is the saying, and worthy of full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the foremost.
But because of this I was shown mercy, that in me, the foremost, Christ Jesus might display perfect patience, as a pattern for those being about to believe on Him to eternal life.
Now to the King of the ages, the immortal, invisible, only God, be honor and glory to the ages of the ages. Amen.
I commit to you this charge, Timothy, my child, according to the prophecies going before as to you, that by them you might wage the good warfare,
holding faith and a good conscience, which some, having cast away, have caused a shipwreck concerning the faith,
among whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan, that they may be disciplined not to blaspheme.
First of all, therefore, I exhort entreaties, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings, to be made on behalf of all men
for kings and all those being in authority, so that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and dignity.
This is good and acceptable before God our Savior,
who desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
the One having given Himself as a ransom for all, the testimony in their own proper times,
in regard to which I was appointed a herald and an apostle—I am speaking the truth; I do not lie—a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
Therefore I desire the men in every place to pray, lifting up holy hands, apart from anger and dissension.
Likewise also women should adorn themselves in respectable apparel, with modesty and self-control, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or costly clothing,
but with what is becoming to women, professing the fear of God through good works.
Let a woman learn in quietness, in all submissiveness.
But I do not permit a woman to teach, nor to use authority over a man, but to be in quietness.
For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
And Adam was not deceived, but the woman, having been deceived, has come into transgression.
But she will be saved through childbearing, if they abide in faith and love and holiness, with self-restraint.
Trustworthy is the saying: If anyone aspires to overseership, he is desirous of a good work.
Therefore it behooves the overseer to be above reproach, the husband of one wife, sober, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
not given to wine, not a striker, but gentle, peaceable, not loving money,
managing the own house well, having children in submission, with all dignity—
but if one does not know how to manage the own household, how will he care for the church of God?—
not a novice, lest having been puffed up, he might fall into the judgment of the devil.
And it behooves him also to have a good testimony from those outside, so that he might not fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Deacons likewise must be dignified, not double-tongued, not being given to much wine, not greedy of dishonest gain,
holding to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
And these also, let them be tested first; then let them serve, being blameless.
Women likewise must be dignified, not slanderers, clear-minded, faithful in all things.
Let deacons be husbands of one wife, managing the children and the own households well.
For those having served well acquire a good standing for themselves and great confidence in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
I am writing these things to you, hoping to come to you in a short time,
but if I should delay, so that you may know how it behooves one to conduct oneself in the household of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth.
And confessedly, great is the mystery of godliness: Who was revealed in the flesh, was justified in the Spirit, was seen by angels, was proclaimed among the nations, was believed on in the world, was taken up in glory.
But the Spirit expressly states that in later times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceitful spirits and teachings of demons,
in the hypocrisy of liars, having been seared in the own conscience,
forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from foods that God created for reception with thanksgiving by the faithful and those knowing the truth.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving,
for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
Laying before the brothers these things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, being nourished in the words of the faith, and of the good teaching that you have closely followed.
But refuse profane and silly fables. Rather, train yourself to godliness.
For bodily exercise is of a little profit, but godliness is profitable for everything, holding the promise of the present life and of the one coming.
Trustworthy is the saying, and worthy of full acceptance.
For to this we toil and strive, because we have hope on the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of believers.
Command and teach these things.
Let no one despise your youth, but be a pattern for the believers in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
Until I come, give heed to the public reading of Scripture, to exhortation, to teaching.
Do not be negligent of the gift in you, which was given to you through prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the elderhood.
Ponder these things; be absorbed in them, so that your progress may be evident to all.
Give heed to yourself and to the teaching. Continue in them; for doing this, you will save both yourself and those hearing you.
Do not rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father; younger men as brothers;
elder women as mothers; and younger women as sisters, in all purity.
Honor widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn to be devout first to the own household and to give recompense to parents; for this is pleasing before God.
Now she who is a widow indeed, and being left alone, has hope in God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
But she living in self-indulgence is dead while living.
Also command these things, so that they should be above reproach.
Now if anyone does not provide for the own, and especially his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
Let a widow be enrolled, being not less than sixty years old, the wife of one man,
being borne witness to in good works: if she has brought up children, if she has entertained strangers, if she has washed the feet of the saints, if she has imparted relief to those being oppressed, if she has followed after every good work.
But refuse younger widows; for when they might grow wanton against Christ, they desire to marry,
incurring judgment, because they have cast off the first faith.
And at the same time also, going about house to house, they learn to be idle; and not only idle, but also gossips and busybodies, speaking things not being proper.
Therefore I want the younger ones to marry, to bear children, to manage their households, to give the one opposing no occasion on account of reproach.
For already some have turned aside after Satan.
If any believing woman has dependent widows, let her impart relief to them, and let the church not be burdened, so that it may impart relief to those who are truly widows.
Let the elders ruling well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those laboring in the word and the teaching.
For the Scripture says, “You shall not muzzle an ox treading out grain,” and, “The workman is worthy of his wages.”
Do not receive an accusation against an elder, except upon two or three witnesses.
But those sinning, rebuke before all, so that the rest might have fear as well.
I earnestly testify before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels that you should keep these things apart from prejudice, doing nothing out of partiality.
Lay hands on no one hastily, nor share in the sins of others; keep yourself pure.
No longer drink only water, but use a little wine, because of the stomach and your frequent ailments.
The sins of some men are manifest, going before them to judgment; but of some also they appear later.
Likewise also, the good works are evident, and even those being otherwise are unable to be concealed.
As many as are under a yoke as slaves, let them esteem the own masters worthy of all honor, so that the name of God and the teaching should not be blasphemed.
Now those having believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brothers; but rather, let them serve them, because those being helped by the good service are believing and beloved. Teach and exhort these things.
If anyone teaches another doctrine and does not draw near, being sound in the words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the teaching according to godliness,
he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but unhealthy about controversies and disputes about words, out of which come envy, strife, slander, evil suspicions,
and constant frictions among men corrupted in mind and destitute of the truth, holding godliness to be a means of gain.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
For we brought nothing into the world, because neither are we able to carry out anything.
But having sustenance and coverings, with these we will be content.
But those desiring to be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge men into ruin and destruction.
For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evils, which some, stretching after, have been seduced away from the faith and have pierced themselves with many sorrows.
But you, O man of God, flee these things and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance, and gentleness.
Fight the good fight of the faith. Lay hold of the eternal life to which you were called, and also did confess the good confession before many witnesses.
I charge you before God, the One giving life to all things, and Christ Jesus, the One having testified the good confession before Pontius Pilate,
for you to keep the commandment, without stain, above reproach, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which He will display in the own seasons, blessed and alone Sovereign, the King of those being kings, and the Lord of those being lords,
alone having immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no one of men has seen nor is able to see, to whom be honor and eternal dominion. Amen.
Instruct the rich in the present age not to be high-minded, nor to have hope in the uncertainty of riches, but on God, the One richly providing us all things for enjoyment;
to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous in distributing, ready to share,
treasuring up for themselves a good foundation for the future, so that they may take hold of that which is indeed life.
O Timothy, guard the deposit committed to you, avoiding profane, empty babblings, and opposing arguments falsely called knowledge,
which some professing, have gone astray from the faith. Grace be with you all.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, according to the promise of life in Christ Jesus,
To Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I am thankful to God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure conscience, as I have the remembrance of you unceasingly in my prayers, night and day,
longing to see you, recalling your tears, so that I may be filled with joy,
having taken remembrance of the sincere faith within you, which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that it is in you also.
For this reason I remind you to kindle anew the gift of God, which is in you by the laying on of my hands.
For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of self-control.
Therefore you should not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me, His prisoner; but suffer together for the gospel, according to the power of God,
the One having saved us and having called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, having been given us in Christ Jesus before time eternal,
and now having been made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus, having abolished death and having brought to light life and immortality through the gospel,
to which I was appointed a herald, and an apostle, and a teacher.
For this reason I also suffer these things. But I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that He is able to guard my deposit entrusted for that day.
Retain the pattern of sound words, which you have heard from me, in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
Keep the good deposit entrusted to you by the Holy Spirit, the One dwelling in us.
You know this, that all those in Asia turned away from me, among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he refreshed me often, and he was not ashamed of my chain.
But having arrived in Rome, he earnestly sought me out and found me.
May the Lord grant unto him to find mercy from the Lord in that day! And you know very well how much he served in Ephesus.
You therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
And the things that you have heard from me among many witnesses, entrust these to faithful men who will be competent to teach others also.
Share in suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
No one serving as a soldier entangles himself in the affairs of this life, that he might please the one having enlisted him.
Now also, if anyone competes, he is not crowned unless he shall have competed lawfully.
It is necessary for the hardworking farmer first to partake of the fruits.
Consider the things I am saying, for the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
Remember Jesus Christ, having been raised out from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my gospel,
in which I suffer hardship even to chains as an evildoer. But the word of God is not bound!
Because of this, I endure all things for the sake of the elect, so that they also may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
Trustworthy is the saying: For if we have died together with Him, we will also live together with Him;
if we endure, we will also reign together with Him; if we will deny Him, He also will deny us;
if we are faithless, He remains faithful, for He is not able to deny Himself.
Remind them these things, solemnly charging them before God not to quarrel about words, for nothing profitable but to the subversion of those hearing.
Hasten to present yourself approved to God, a workman not ashamed, accurately handling the word of truth.
But avoid worldly, empty babblings, for they will lead on to more ungodliness,
and their talk will have pasture to grow like gangrene, among whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who have gone astray concerning the truth, asserting the resurrection already to have taken place; and they are overthrowing the faith of some.
Nevertheless, the firm foundation of God stands, having this seal: “The Lord knows those being His,” and, “Let everyone naming the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.”
Now in a great house, there are not only golden and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen; and some indeed unto honor, but some unto dishonor.
Therefore if anyone shall have cleansed himself from these, he will be a vessel for honor, having been sanctified, useful to the Master, having been prepared for every good work.
Now flee youthful lusts and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, along with those calling on the Lord out of pure a heart.
And refuse foolish and ignorant speculations, knowing that they breed quarrels.
And it behooves the bond-servant of the Lord not to quarrel, but to be gentle toward all, able to teach, forbearing,
in gentleness disciplining those opposing, lest ever God may give them repentance unto a knowledge of the truth,
and they might come to their senses out of the snare of the devil, having been captured by him for his will.
But realize this, that in the last days difficult times will be present.
For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boasters, proud, verbally abusive, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy,
unloving, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, savage, haters of good,
betrayers, reckless, puffed up, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God,
having a form of godliness but denying its power. And turn away from these.
For out of this sort are those entering into households and taking captive weak women, burdened with sins, being led away by various passions,
always learning and never being able to come to a knowledge of the truth.
Now as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also these oppose the truth, men being depraved in mind, disqualified regarding the faith.
But they will not advance much further, for their folly will be plain to all, as also that of those two became.
But you have closely followed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
persecutions, sufferings such as happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra; what manner of persecutions I endured! And yet the Lord delivered me out of all.
And all also desiring to live piously in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
But evil men and impostors will advance to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
But you, abide in the things you have learned and have been assured of, having known from whom you learned them,
and that from childhood you have known the sacred writings, being able to make you wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
Every Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for instruction, for conviction, for correction, and for training in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be complete, having been fully equipped toward every good work.
I earnestly declare before God and Christ Jesus, the One being about to judge the living and the dead, and by His appearing and His kingdom:
Preach the word; be ready in season and out of season; convict, rebuke, and exhort, with complete patience and instruction.
For there will be a time when they will not endure sound teaching, but according to the own desires, having an itching ear, they will gather around them teachers to suit themselves,
and indeed they will turn away from hearing the truth, and will be turned aside unto myths.
But you, be sober in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, fully carry out your ministry.
For already I am being poured out, and the time of my departure is come.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.
From now on the crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me in that day; but not only to me, but also to all those loving His appearing.
Be diligent to come to me quickly,
for Demas has deserted me, having loved the present age, and he has gone to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
Luke alone is with me. Having taken Mark, bring him with you, for he is useful to me for the ministry.
But I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
Upon coming, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus in Troas, and the books, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did great harm to me. The Lord will render to him according to his deeds,
whom you also beware of, for exceedingly he has opposed our message.
In my first defense, no one has stood with me, but all deserted me. May it be not charged to them!
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the proclamation would be fully accomplished, and all the Gentiles should hear. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
The Lord will deliver me from every evil deed and will bring me safely into His heavenly kingdom, to whom is the glory unto the ages of the ages. Amen.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
Erastus remained in Corinth, but Trophimus I left ailing in Miletus.
Be earnest to come before winter. Eubulus greets you, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brothers.
The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you all.
Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the elect of God and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
in the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before time eternal
and in His own seasons revealed in His word, in the proclamation with which I have been entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior.
To Titus, my true child according to our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
On account of this I left you in Crete, that you might set in order the things lacking and might appoint elders in every town, as I directed you,
if anyone is blameless, the husband of one wife, having believing children, not under accusation of debauchery, or insubordinate.
For it behooves the overseer to be blameless, as God’s steward; not self-willed, not quick tempered, not given to wine, not a striker, not greedy of base gain,
but hospitable, a lover of good, self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined;
holding to the faithful word according to the teaching, that he may be able both to encourage with sound teaching and to convict those contradicting it.
For there are also many insubordinate, empty talkers, and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,
whom it is necessary to silence, who overthrow whole households, teaching things that they ought not for the sake of base gain.
One of them, a prophet of their own, said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”
This testimony is true, for which cause rebuke them severely, so that they may be sound in the faith,
not giving heed to Jewish myths and the commandments of men turning away from the truth.
To the pure all things are pure; but to those being defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. Instead, both their mind and conscience are defiled.
They profess to know God, but in their works they deny Him, being detestable and disobedient and unfit for any good work.
But you, speak the things that are consistent with the sound doctrine.
The aged men are to be sober-minded, dignified, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, in endurance;
the aged women likewise reverent in behavior, not slanderers, not being enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is good,
so that they may train the young women to be lovers of their husbands, loving their children,
self-controlled, pure, keepers at home, kind, being subject to the own husbands, so that the word of God should not be maligned.
Likewise, exhort the younger men to be self-controlled.
In all things be holding forth yourself as a pattern of good works, in the teaching, integrity, dignity,
and sound speech beyond reproach, so that he who is of the contrary may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say concerning us.
Servants are to be subject to their own masters in everything, to be well-pleasing, not gainsaying,
not pilfering, but showing all good fidelity, so that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.
For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,
instructing us that, having denied ungodliness and worldly passions, we should live discreetly and righteously and piously in the present age,
awaiting the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ,
who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all lawlessness and might purify to Himself a people specially chosen, zealous of good works.
Speak these things, and exhort and rebuke with all authority. Let no one despise you.
Remind them to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
to speak evil of no one, to be peaceable, to be gentle, showing all humility toward all men.
For we ourselves were also once foolish, disobedient, being deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.
But when the kindness and the love of mankind of God our Savior appeared,
He saved us, not by works in righteousness that we did, but according to His mercy, through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit,
whom He poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
so that, having been justified by that grace, we should become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
Trustworthy is the saying, and I want you to affirm strongly concerning these things, so that those believing God may take care to be devoted to good works. These things are excellent and profitable to men.
But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and arguments and quarrels about the Law; for they are unprofitable and worthless.
Reject a factious man after one and a second admonition,
knowing that such a man is corrupt and is sinning, being self-condemned.
When I shall send Artemas or Tychicus to you, be diligent to come to me into Nicopolis; for I have decided to winter there.
Earnestly equip Zenas the lawyer and Apollos, so that nothing should be lacking to them.
And also let our people learn to devote themselves to good works for necessary needs, so that they should not be unfruitful.
All those with me greet you. Greet those loving us in the faith. Grace be with all of you.
Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, To Philemon, our beloved and fellow worker,
and to Apphia our sister, and to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church at your house:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always, making mention of you upon my prayers,
hearing of your love and the faith that you have toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints,
so that the fellowship of your faith might become effective in the acknowledgment of every good thing that is in you toward Christ.
For I have great joy and encouragement by occasion of your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed by you, brother.
Therefore, having much boldness in Christ to order you what is befitting,
rather, I exhort you for the sake of love, being such a one as Paul, now aged and also a prisoner of Christ Jesus.
I exhort you for my child whom I have begotten in chains, Onesimus,
once useless to you, but now useful both to you and to me,
whom I have sent back to you in person—he who is my very heart—
whom I was wishing to keep with myself, so that on behalf of you he might serve me in the chains of the gospel.
But I wanted to do nothing apart from your consent, so that your good may be not as according to necessity, but according to willingness.
For perhaps because of this he was separated from you for a time, so that you might possess him eternally,
no longer as a slave, but above a slave, a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
Therefore, if you consider me a partner, receive him as me.
But if in any way he has wronged you or he owes you, charge this to me.
I Paul did write with my own hand. I will repay it, that I may not say to you that you owe also to me even yourself.
Yes, brother, may I have profit from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in Christ.
Being persuaded of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even above what I say.
Now at the same time, also prepare a lodging for me; for I hope that through your prayers, I will be granted to you.
Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you,
as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
God, having spoken long ago to our fathers in the prophets in many portions and in many ways,
in these last days has spoken to us in His Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, and through whom He made the ages,
who, being the radiance of His glory and the exact expression of His substance, and upholding all things by the power of His word, through having made the purification of sins, sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
having become by so much superior to the angels, as much as He has inherited a name more excellent beyond theirs.
For to which of the angels did He ever say: “You are my Son; today I have begotten You”? And again: “I will be to Him for a Father, and He will be to Me for a Son”?
And again, when He brings the Firstborn into the world, He says: “And let all God’s angels worship Him.”
And indeed as to the angels He says: “The One making His angels winds, and His ministers a flame of fire.”
But unto the Son: “Your throne, O God, is to the age of the age, and the scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Your kingdom.
You have loved righteousness and have hated wickedness; because of this, God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of exultation above Your companions.”
And: “You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning, and the heavens are works of Your hands.
They will perish but You remain; and all will grow old like a garment;
and like a robe You will roll them up, and like a garment they will be changed; but You are the same, and Your years will never end.”
Now to which of the angels did He ever say: “Sit at My right hand, until I may place Your enemies as a footstool for Your feet”?
Are they not all ministering spirits, being sent forth for service for the sake of those being about to inherit salvation?
Because of this, it behooves us to give heed more abundantly to the things we have heard, lest ever we should drift away.
For if the word having been spoken by angels was unalterable, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense,
how shall we escape, having neglected such a great salvation, which, having received a commencement declared by the Lord, was confirmed to us by those having heard,
God bearing witness with them both by signs and wonders, and by various miracles and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to His will.
For not to angels did He subject the world that is coming, of which we are speaking,
but someone somewhere has testified, saying, “What is man, that You are mindful of him, or the son of man, that You care for him?
You made him a little lower than the angels; You crowned him with glory and honor;
You have put in subjection all things under his feet. For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing unsubject to him. But at present not yet do we see all things having been subjected to him.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, because of the suffering of death, having been crowned with glory and with honor, so that by the grace of God He might taste death for everyone.
For it was fitting to Him, for whom are all things and by whom are all things, having brought many sons to glory, to make perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings.
For both the One sanctifying and those being sanctified are all of one, for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brothers,
saying: “I will declare Your name to My brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will sing Your praises.”
And again: “I will be trusting in Him.” And again: “Behold, I and the children whom God has given Me.”
Therefore, since the children have partaken of blood and of flesh, He also likewise took part in the same things, so that through His death He might destroy the one holding the power of death, that is, the devil,
and might set free those who all their time to live were subject to slavery through fear of death.
For surely He helps not the angels, but He helps the seed of Abraham.
Therefore it behooved Him to be made like the brothers in all things, so that He might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, in order to make propitiation for the sins of the people.
For in that He Himself has suffered, having been tempted, He is able to help those being tempted.
Therefore, holy brothers, partakers of the heavenly calling, carefully consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession,
being faithful to the One having appointed Him, as Moses also in all His house.
For He has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, by so much as the one having built it has greater honor than the house itself.
For every house is built by someone, but the One having built everything is God.
And indeed Moses was faithful as a servant in all His house, unto a testimony of the things going to be spoken,
but Christ as the Son over His house, whose house we are, if indeed we should hold our confidence and the boast of our hope.
Therefore, just as the Holy Spirit says: “Today if you should hear His voice,
do not harden your hearts, as in the rebellion, in the day of testing in the wilderness,
where forty years your fathers tried Me by testing and saw My works.
Therefore I was angry with that generation, and I said, ‘Always they go astray in their heart; and they have not known My ways;’
so I swore in My wrath, ‘They shall not enter into My rest.’”
Take heed, brothers, lest ever there will be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, into falling away from the living God.
But encourage one another every day, while it is called today, so that not one of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become partakers of Christ, if indeed we should hold firm unto the end the assurance from the beginning.
As it is said: “Today if you should hear His voice, do not harden your hearts, as in the rebellion.”
For who were those having heard, rebelled, but not all those having come out of Egypt by the leading of Moses?
And with whom was He indignant forty years, if not with those having sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
And to whom did He swear that they shall not enter into His rest, if not to those having disobeyed?
And we see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.
Therefore, of the promise to enter into His rest left remaining, we should fear, lest ever any of you should seem to have fallen short.
And indeed we are those having had the gospel preached just as they did; but the message of their hearing did not profit them, not having been united with the faith of those having heard.
For those having believed enter into the rest, as He has said: “So I swore in my wrath, ‘they shall not enter into My rest.’” And yet the works have been finished from the foundation of the world.
For He has spoken somewhere concerning the seventh day in this way, “And on the seventh day God rested from all His works.”
And again in this passage. “They shall not enter into My rest.”
Therefore, since it remains for some to enter into it, and those having received the good news formerly did not enter in because of disobedience,
again He appoints a certain day as “Today,” saying through David after so long a time, just as it has been said, “Today, if you shall hear His voice, do not harden your hearts.”
For if Joshua had given rest to them, He would not have spoken after this about another day.
So then, there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God.
For the one having entered into His rest, he also rested from his works, as God did from the own.
Therefore we should be diligent to enter into that rest, so that no one should fall by the same example of disobedience.
For the word of God is living and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, penetrating even as far as the division of soul and spirit, and of joints and marrows, and able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
And there is no creature hidden before Him, but all things are uncovered and laid bare to the eyes of Him to whom is our reckoning.
Therefore having a great high priest having passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, we should hold firmly to our confession.
For we do not have a high priest not being able to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one having been tempted in all things by the same way, without sin.
Therefore we should come with boldness to the throne of grace, so that we may receive mercy and may find grace for help in time of need.
For every high priest, being taken from among men, is appointed on behalf of men in things relating to God, that he should offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins,
being able to exercise forbearance with those being ignorant and going astray, since he himself also is encompassed by weakness;
and because of this, he is obligated to offer sacrifices for sins, so also for himself, just as for the people.
And no one takes upon himself the honor, but rather being called by God, just as Aaron also.
So also Christ did not glorify Himself to become a high priest, but the One having said to Him: “You are My Son, today I have begotten You.”
Just as He says also in another place: “You are a priest to the age, according to the order of Melchizedek.”
He in the days of His flesh, having offered up both prayers and supplications with loud crying and tears to the One being able to save Him from death, and having been heard because of reverent submission,
though being a Son, He learned obedience from the things He suffered,
and having been perfected, He became the author of eternal salvation to all those obeying Him,
having been designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
Concerning this there is much speech from us, and difficult in interpretation to speak, since you have become sluggish in the hearings.
For even by the time you ought to be teachers, you have need of one to teach you again what is the beginning of the principles of the oracles of God; and you have become those having need of milk, and not of solid food.
For everyone partaking of milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is an infant.
But solid food is for the mature, the ones by constant use having trained the senses for distinguishing both good and evil.
Therefore, having left the beginning teaching of the Christ, we should go on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works, and faith in God,
instruction about baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
And this we will do, if God permits.
For it is impossible for those once having been enlightened, and having tasted of the heavenly gift, and having become partakers of the Holy Spirit,
and having tasted the goodness of God’s word and the power of the coming age—
and then having fallen away—to restore them again to repentance, crucifying in themselves the Son of God and subjecting Him to open shame.
For land having drunk in the rain coming often upon it and producing vegetation useful for those for the sake of whom also it is tilled, partakes of blessing from God.
But that bringing forth thorns and thistles is worthless and near to a curse, of which the end is unto burning.
But even if we speak like this, beloved, we are persuaded of better things concerning you, and things accompanying salvation.
For God is not unjust to forget your work and the love that you have shown toward His name, having ministered to the saints, and still ministering.
And we desire each of you to show the same earnestness, toward the full assurance of the hope unto the end,
so that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of those inheriting the promises through faith and patience.
For God, having made His promise to Abraham, since He had no one greater to swear by, swore by Himself,
saying, “Surely if blessing, I will bless you; and multiplying, I will multiply you.”
And thus having waited patiently, he obtained the promise.
For men swear by one greater, and an end of all their disputes, for confirmation, is the oath,
in which God, desiring to show more abundantly the unchangeableness of His purpose to the heirs of the promise, guaranteed it by an oath,
so that by two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement, having fled for refuge, to take hold of the hope being set before us,
which we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and unshakable and entering into that within the veil,
where Jesus, the forerunner for us, has entered, having become a high priest to the age, according to the order of Melchizedek.
For this Melchizedek, King of Salem, priest of God Most High, having met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and having blessed him,
is he to whom also Abraham apportioned a tenth of all, first indeed being translated, “king of righteousness;” and then also, “king of Salem,” which is, “king of peace.”
Without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but having been made like the Son of God, he remains a priest unto all time.
Now consider how great this one was, to whom even Abraham the patriarch gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
And indeed, those out from the sons of Levi receiving the priestly office have a commandment to take a tenth from the people, according to the Law, that is, from their brothers, though having come out of the loin of Abraham.
But the one not tracing his ancestry from them has collected a tenth from Abraham and has blessed the one having the promises.
And apart from all dispute, the inferior is blessed by the superior.
And indeed here, dying men receive tithes; but in that place, it is testified that he lives on;
and so, to say a word, even Levi, the one receiving tithes, has been tithed through Abraham.
For he was still in the loin of his father when Melchizedek met him.
Then indeed, if perfection were by the Levitical priesthood (for upon it the people had received the Law) what need was there still for another priest to arise, according to the order of Melchizedek, and not to be named according to the order of Aaron?
For of the priesthood being changed, from necessity a change of Law also takes place.
For he concerning whom these things are said belonged to another tribe, from which no one has served at the altar.
For it is evident that our Lord has sprung out of Judah, a tribe as to which Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.
And it is yet more abundantly evident if another priest according to the likeness of Melchizedek arises,
who has been constituted not according to a law of a fleshly commandment, but according to the power of an indestructible life.
For it is testified: “You are a priest to the age, according to the order of Melchizedek.”
For indeed, there is a putting away of the preceding commandment, because of its weakness and uselessness
(for the Law perfected nothing), and the introduction of a better hope, by which we draw near to God.
And inasmuch as it was not apart from an oath, for those ones truly are becoming priests without an oath,
He, however, was with an oath through the One saying to Him: “The Lord has sworn and will not change His mind, ‘You are a priest to the age.’”
By so much also, Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
And indeed those having become priests are many, because of being prevented from continuing by death.
But because of His abiding to the age, He holds the permanent priesthood,
wherefore also He is able to save to the uttermost those drawing near to God through Him, always living for to intercede for them.
For such a high priest indeed was fitting for us, holy, innocent, undefiled, having been separated from sinners, and having become higher than the heavens,
who has no need every day, as the first high priests, to offer up sacrifices for the own sins, then for those of the people; for He did this once for all, having offered up Himself.
For the Law appoints as high priests men having weakness; but the word of the oath, which is after the Law, a Son having been perfected to the age.
Now the point of the things being spoken of is that we have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a minister in the holy places and in the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, not man.
For every high priest is appointed in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices; wherefore it was necessary for this One also to have something that He might offer.
Then certainly if He were on earth, not even would He be a priest, there being those offering the gifts according to Law,
who serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly, as Moses was divinely instructed, being about to complete the tabernacle. For He says, “See that you shall make all things according to the pattern having been shown you in the mountain.”
But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, as much as He is also the mediator of a better covenant, which has been enacted upon better promises.
For if what was first had been faultless, no place would have been sought for a second.
For finding fault with them, He says: “Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, and I will ratify a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah,
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day of My having taken hold of their hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not continue in My covenant, and I disregarded them, says the Lord.
For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, putting My Laws into their mind, and I will inscribe them upon their hearts; and I will be to them God, and they will be to Me for a people.
And they shall not teach, each his neighbor, and each his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ because all will know Me, from the least of them to the greatest,
because I will be merciful toward their iniquities, and I shall remember their sins no more.
In saying, “new,” He has made obsolete the first; and that which is growing old and aging is near vanishing.
Therefore also indeed, the first had regulations of worship and an earthly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared, the first room in which were both the lampstand and the table, and the bread of the presentation, which is called the Holy Place.
Now behind the second veil was a tabernacle, being called the Holy of Holies,
having the golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant, having been covered around in every part with gold, in which was the golden pot having the manna, and the staff of Aaron having budded, and the tablets of the covenant.
And above it were the cherubim of glory, overshadowing the mercy seat; concerning which it is not now the time to speak in detail.
Now these things having been prepared thus, indeed the priests enter into the first tabernacle regularly, accomplishing the sacred services.
But only the high priest enters into the second, once in the year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and the sins of ignorance of the people.
By this the Holy Spirit was signifying that the way into the holy places has not yet been made manifest, the first tabernacle still having a standing,
which is a symbol for the present time, in which both gifts and sacrifices are offered, not being able to make perfect in regard to conscience the one worshiping,
consisting only in foods and drinks and various washings—ordinances of the flesh being imposed until the time of reformation.
But Christ, having appeared as high priest of the good things having come, by the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made by hands, that is, not of this creation,
nor by blood of goats and calves, but through the own blood, He entered once for all into the holy places, having obtained eternal redemption.
For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those having been defiled sanctify them for the purification of the flesh,
how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself unblemished to God, purify our conscience from dead works, in order to serve the living God!
And because of this, He is the mediator of a new covenant, so that, death having taken place for redemption of the transgressions under the first covenant, those having been called might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
For where there is a will, it is necessary to establish the death of the one having made it.
For a will is affirmed after death, since it is not in force at the time when the one having made it is living,
wherefore neither has the first been inaugurated apart from blood.
For of every commandment having been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the Law, having taken the blood of calves and of goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
saying, “This is the blood of the covenant, which God commanded unto you.”
And likewise he sprinkled also the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry with blood.
And almost all things are purified with blood according to the Law, and apart from blood-shedding there is no forgiveness.
Therefore it was necessary indeed for the representations of the things in the heavens to be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
For Christ has entered not into holy places made by hands, copies of the true ones, but into heaven itself, now to appear for us in the presence of God,
nor that He should offer Himself repeatedly, just as the high priest enters into the holy places every year with the blood of another.
Otherwise it was necessary for Him to have suffered repeatedly from the foundation of the world. But now He has been revealed once in the consummation of the ages for the putting away of sin by the sacrifice of Himself.
And inasmuch as it is apportioned to men to die once, and after this, judgment,
so also Christ, having been offered once in order to bear the sins of many, will appear for a second time, apart from sin, to those awaiting Him for salvation.
For the Law, having a shadow of the good things coming, not the form of the things themselves, never is able each year, with the same sacrifices which they offer continually, to perfect those drawing near.
Otherwise, would they not have ceased being offered, because of those serving having been cleansed once, no longer having conscience of sins?
But in these, there is a reminder of sins every year.
For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and of goats to take away sins.
Therefore coming into the world, He says: “Sacrifice and offering You have not desired, but a body You have prepared me.
In burnt offerings and offerings for sin You have not delighted.
Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come— in the scroll of the book it is written of Me— to do Your will, O God.’”
Saying above, “Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and offerings for sin, You have not desired, nor have You delighted in” (which are offered according to the Law),
then He said, “Behold, I have come to do Your will.” He takes away the first that He might establish the second.
By that will, we are having been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
And indeed every priest stands every day, ministering and offering the same sacrifices repeatedly, which never are able to take away sins.
But this One, having offered one sacrifice for sins in perpetuity, sat down at the right hand of God,
the henceforth awaiting until His enemies should be placed as a footstool for His feet.
For by one offering, He has perfected for all time those being sanctified.
And the Holy Spirit also bears witness to us; for after having said before:
“This is the covenant that I will make with them, after those days, says the Lord, putting My Laws into their hearts, and I will inscribe them into their mind,”
and, “Their sins and their lawless acts, I will remember no more.”
Now where there is forgiveness of these, no longer is there an offering for sin.
Therefore brothers, having confidence for entering the holy places by the blood of Jesus,
by a new and living way, which He dedicated for us through the veil that is His flesh,
and having a great priest over the house of God,
we should draw near with a sincere heart, in full assurance of faith, our hearts having been sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our body having been washed with pure water.
We should hold fast to the confession of our hope, unwavering; for the One having promised is faithful.
And we should think toward stirring up one another to love and to good works,
not forsaking the assembling together of ourselves as is the custom with some, but encouraging one another, and so much more as you see the Day drawing near.
For if we sin willingly after we are to receive the knowledge of the truth, no longer remains a sacrifice for sins,
but a certain terrifying expectation of judgment and fury of fire being about to devour the adversaries.
Anyone having set aside the Law of Moses dies without mercies on the basis of two or three witnesses.
How much worse punishment do you think will he deserve, the one having trampled upon the Son of God, and having esteemed ordinary the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and having insulted the Spirit of grace?
For we know the One having said, “Vengeance is Mine; I will repay,” and again, “The Lord will judge His people.”
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But remember the former days in which, having been enlightened, you endured a great conflict of sufferings,
this indeed, being made a spectacle both by revilings and tribulations; now this, having become partners of those passing through them thus.
For both you sympathized with the prisoners and you accepted the plundering of your possessions with joy, knowing yourselves to have a better and abiding possession.
Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has a great reward.
For you have need of endurance, so that, having done the will of God, you may receive the promise.
For “Yet in a very while little, the One coming will come, and will not delay.
But My righteous one will live by faith; and if he might shrink back, My soul does not take pleasure in him.”
But we are not of those drawing back to destruction, but of faith to the preserving of the soul.
Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not being seen.
For in this the ancients were commended.
By faith we understand the universe to have been formed by the word of God, so that the things being seen have not been made from the things being visible.
By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, through which he was testified to be righteous, God bearing witness to his gifts; and through it, having died, he still speaks.
By faith Enoch was translated not to see death, and he was not found, because God had taken him up. For before the translation, he was commended to have pleased God.
And without faith, it is impossible to please Him. For it behooves the one drawing near to God to believe that He exists and that He becomes a rewarder to those earnestly seeking Him out.
By faith Noah, having been divinely instructed concerning the things not yet seen, having been moved with fear, prepared an ark for the salvation of his household, by which he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness that is according to faith.
By faith Abraham, being called to go out into a place that he was going to receive for an inheritance, obeyed and went out, not knowing where he is going.
By faith he sojourned in the land of the promise, as in a foreign country, having dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the joint-heirs of the same promise.
For he was awaiting the city having foundations, of which the architect and builder is God.
By faith also Sarah, herself barren, received power for the conception of seed, even beyond the opportune age, since she considered the One having promised faithful.
Therefore also were born from one man, and he having been as good as dead, as the stars of heaven in multitude, and countless as the sand by the shore of the sea.
These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them from afar, and having embraced them, and having confessed that they are strangers and sojourners on the earth.
For those saying such things make manifest that they are seeking their own country.
And indeed if they had been remembering that from where they came out, they would have had opportunity to return.
But now they stretch forward to a better one, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for He has prepared a city for them.
By faith Abraham, being tested, has offered up Isaac. Even the one having received the promises was offering up his only begotten son,
as to whom it was said, “In Isaac your offspring will be reckoned,”
having reasoned that God was able even to raise him out from the dead, from where he received him also in a simile.
By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning the things coming.
By faith Jacob, dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshiped on the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, dying, made mention concerning the exodus of the sons of Israel and gave instructions concerning his bones.
By faith Moses, having been born, was hidden three months by his parents, because they saw the little child was beautiful, and they did not fear the edict of the king.
By faith Moses, having become grown, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
having chosen to suffer affliction with the people of God, rather than to have the fleeting enjoyment of sin,
having esteemed the reproach of Christ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt; for he was looking toward the reward.
By faith he left Egypt, not having feared the anger of the king; for he persevered, as seeing the Invisible One.
By faith he has kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the one destroying the firstborn would not touch them.
By faith they passed through the Red Sea as through dry land, which the Egyptians, an attempt having made, were swallowed up.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell, having been encircled for seven days.
By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those having disobeyed, having received the spies with peace.
And what more shall I say? For the time will fail me, telling of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, also David, and Samuel, and the prophets,
who by faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, obtained promises; shut the mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, escaped the mouths of the sword; acquired strength out of weakness, became mighty in war, put to flight foreign armies.
Women received back their dead by resurrection; and others were tortured, not having accepted release, so that they might obtain a better resurrection.
And others received the trial of mockings and of scourgings, and in addition, of chains and imprisonment.
They were stoned, they were sawed in two, they were killed by slaughter of the sword; they wandered in sheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute, being oppressed, being mistreated;
of whom the world was not worthy; wandering in deserts, and mountains, and caves, and holes of the earth.
And these all, having been commended through the faith, did not receive the promise,
God having planned something better for us, so that not apart from us, they should be made perfect.
Therefore we also, having such a great cloud of witnesses encompassing us, having laid aside every weight and the sin easily entangling, should run with endurance the race lying before us,
looking to Jesus, the founder and perfecter of our faith, who in view of the joy lying before Him endured the cross, having despised its shame, and sat down at right hand of the throne of God.
For consider fully the One having endured such great hostility from sinners against Himself, so that you shall not grow weary, fainting in your souls.
Not yet have you resisted unto blood, struggling against sin,
and you have forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as to sons: “My son, do not regard lightly the Lord’s discipline, nor faint being reproved by Him.
For the Lord disciplines whom He loves, and He scourges every son whom He receives.
If you endure discipline, God is treating you as sons; for what son is there whom his father does not discipline?
But if you are without discipline, of which they have all become partakers, then you are illegitimate children and not sons.
Furthermore indeed, we have had fathers of our flesh, correctors, and we respected them; and shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of spirits and shall live?
For truly they were disciplining us for a few days, according to that seeming good to them; but He for our benefitting, in order to share His holiness.
And all discipline indeed for those being present, does not seem to be of joy, but of grief; but afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those having been trained by it.
Therefore lift up the drooping hands and enfeebled knees,
and make straight paths for your feet, so that the lame should not be put out of joint, but rather should be healed.
Pursue peace with all, and holiness, without which no one will see the Lord,
observing lest any be failing of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up should trouble you and by this, the many might be defiled,
lest there be any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for one meal sold his birthright.
For you know that even afterward, wishing to inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, although having earnestly sought it with tears.
For you have not come to that being touched and having been kindled with fire, and to darkness, and to gloom, and to storm,
and to the sound of a trumpet, and to a voice of words which those having heard excused themselves, asking the word not to be addressed to them,
for they could not bear that being commanded: “If even a beast should touch the mountain, it shall be stoned.”
And the thing appearing was so fearful that Moses said, “I am greatly afraid and trembling.”
But you have come to Mount Zion, and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels,
and to the assembly, to the church of the firstborn having been enrolled in the heavens, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous having been perfected,
and to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkling of blood, speaking better things than that of Abel.
Take heed lest you refuse the One speaking. For if they did not escape, having refused the One divinely instructing them on earth, much less we, turning away from the One from the heavens,
whose voice shook the earth at that time; but now He has promised, saying, “Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also heaven.”
And this, “Yet once more,” signifies the removing of the things being shaken, as having been created, so that the things not being shaken should remain.
Therefore, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken, we may have grace, by which we may serve God well pleasingly, with fear and reverence.
For also, our God is a consuming fire.
Let brotherly love abide.
Do not be forgetful of hospitality, for through this, some have entertained angels unawares.
Remember prisoners as being bound with them; those being mistreated as yourselves also being in the body.
Let marriage be honorable in all, and the marriage bed undefiled; for God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.
Let your manner of life be without covetousness, being satisfied with the present; for He Himself has said: “Never will I leave you, never will I forsake you.”
So we are confident to say: “The Lord is my helper, and I will not be afraid; what shall man do to me?”
Remember those leading you, who spoke the word of God to you, of whom, considering the outcome of their way of life, you are to imitate the faith.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages.
Do not be carried away by various and strange teachings; for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods, in which those being devoted were not profited.
We have an altar from which those serving in the tabernacle have no authority to eat.
For the bodies of those animals whose blood is brought for sin into the holy places by the high priest are burned outside the camp.
Therefore Jesus also suffered outside the gate, so that he might sanctify the people by the own blood.
Therefore we should go forth to Him outside the camp, bearing His reproach.
For here we do not have an abiding city, but we are seeking for the coming one.
Through Him then, we should offer the sacrifice of praise continually, everything to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing His name.
And do not be forgetful of the good, and of the sharing; for God is well pleased with such sacrifices.
Obey you those leading and be submissive—for they watch over your souls, as about to give account—so that they may do this with joy and not groaning, for this is unprofitable for you.
Pray for us, for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring to conduct ourselves well in all things.
And more abundantly I exhort you to do this, so that I may be restored to you more quickly.
Now may the God of peace, having brought out from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, by the blood of the eternal covenant,
equip you in everything good, in order to do His will, working in us that which is well pleasing before Him, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Now I exhort you, brothers, bear with the word of exhortation, for I have only written to you in few words.
You know our brother Timothy has been released, with whom I will see you if he should come sooner.
Greet all those leading you and all the saints. Those from Italy greet you.
Grace be with all of you.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve tribes in the Dispersion: Greetings.
Esteem it all joy, my brothers, when you might fall into various trials,
knowing that testing of your faith produces endurance.
And let endurance have its perfect work, so that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.
Now if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask from God, the One giving generously to all and not finding fault, and it will be given to him.
But let him ask in faith, doubting nothing, for the one doubting is like a wave of the sea, being blown and being tossed by the wind.
For let that man not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord.
He is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
But let the brother of low degree boast in his exaltation,
and he who is rich, in his humiliation, because he will pass away like a flower of grass.
For the sun has risen with its burning heat and withered the grass, and its flower has fallen, and the beauty of its appearance has perished. Thus also the rich man will fade away in the midst of his pursuits.
Blessed is the man who endures trial, because, having been approved, he will receive the crown of life that He has promised to those loving Him.
Let no one being tempted say, “I am being tempted by God.” For God is unable to be tempted by evils, and He Himself tempts no one.
But a man is tempted, being drawn away and being enticed by the own desire.
Then desire having conceived, gives birth to sin; and sin having become fully grown, brings forth death.
Do not be misled, my beloved brothers.
Every good act of giving and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow of shifting.
Having willed it, He brought us forth by the word of truth, for us to be a kind of firstfruits of His creatures.
Know this, my beloved brothers. But let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow unto anger;
for man’s anger does not produce the righteousness of God.
Therefore, having put aside all filthiness and abounding of wickedness, receive in humility the implanted word, being able to save your souls.
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves,
because if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, this one is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror,
for he has viewed himself and has gone away, and immediately he has forgotten of what manner he was.
But the one having looked intently into the perfect law, that of freedom, and having continued in it, not having been a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work—this one will be blessed in his work.
If anyone seems to be religious, not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his heart, the religion of this one is worthless.
Pure and undefiled religion before the God and Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their tribulation; to keep oneself unstained from the world.
My brothers, do not with partiality hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory.
For if a man might come into your assembly in splendid apparel with gold rings, and a poor man in shabby apparel also might come in,
and you should look upon the one wearing the splendid apparel and should say, “You sit here honorably,” and to the poor should say, “You stand,” or, “Sit there under my footstool,”
then have you not made a distinction among yourselves and have become judges with evil thoughts?
Listen, my beloved brothers: Has not God chosen the poor in this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom that He promised to those loving Him?
But you have dishonored the poor. Are not the rich oppressing you and they dragging you into court?
Are they not blaspheming the good Name having been called upon you?
If indeed you keep the royal law according to the Scripture, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well.
But if you show partiality, you are committing sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever shall keep the whole Law, but shall stumble in one point, he has become guilty of all.
For the One having said, “You shall not commit adultery,” also said, “You shall not murder.” But if you do not commit adultery, but do commit murder, you have become a transgressor of the Law.
So speak and so act as being about to be judged by the Law of freedom.
For judgment without mercy will be to the one not having shown mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
What is the profit, my brothers, if anyone says to have faith, but has no works? Is the faith able to save him?
Now if a brother or a sister is without clothes and lacking of daily food,
and anyone out from you says to them, “Go in peace; be warmed and be filled,” but does not give to them the needful things for the body, what is the profit?
So also, faith by itself if it has not works, is dead.
But someone will say, “You have faith, and I have works.” Show me your faith without works, and I will show you faith by my works.
You believe that God is one. You are doing well! Even the demons believe that, and shudder!
But do you want to come to know, O foolish man, that faith apart from works is worthless?
Was not Abraham our father justified by works, having offered his son Isaac upon the altar?
You see that his faith was working with his works, and by his works, his faith was perfected.
And the Scripture was fulfilled, saying, “And Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness,” and he was called a friend of God.
You see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith alone.
And likewise was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works, having received the messengers and having sent them forth by another way?
For just as the body apart from spirit is dead, so also faith apart from works is dead.
Not many of you should be teachers my brothers, knowing that we will receive greater judgment.
For we all stumble in many ways. If anyone does not stumble in what he says, this one is a perfect man, able indeed to bridle the whole body.
Now if we put bits into the mouths of the horses for them to obey us, we turn about even their whole body.
Behold also the ships, being so great and being driven by strong winds, are turned about by a very small rudder wherever the impulse of the one steering resolves.
Thus also the tongue is a small member, and boasts exceeding things. Behold a small fire, how great a forest it kindles.
The tongue also is a fire, the world of unrighteousness. The tongue is set among our members, defiling all the body, and setting on fire the course of nature, and itself being set on fire by Gehenna.
For every species both of beasts and of birds, both of creeping things and things of the sea, is subdued and has been subdued by the human race,
but no one of men is able to subdue the tongue; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse men, those being made according to the likeness of God.
Out of the same mouth proceed forth blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.
Does the spring pour forth out of the same opening both fresh and bitter?
Is a fig tree able, my brothers, to produce olives? Or a vine, figs? Neither is a salt spring able to produce fresh water.
Who is wise and understanding among you; let him show his works out of the good conduct, in the humility of wisdom.
But if you have bitter jealousy and self-interest in your heart, do not boast of it and lie against the truth.
This is not the wisdom coming down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
For where jealousy and self-interest exist, there will be disorder and every evil thing.
But the wisdom from above is indeed first pure, then peaceable, gentle, reasonable, full of mercy and of good fruits, impartial, sincere.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those making peace.
From where come quarrels and from where conflicts among you? Is it not from there, out of your passions warring in your members?
You desire and do not have. You kill and covet and are not able to obtain. You fight and quarrel. You do not have, because you do not ask.
You ask and do not receive, because you ask wrongly, that you may spend it in your pleasures.
Adulteresses! Do you not know that friendship with the world is hostility with God? Therefore whoever has chosen to be a friend of the world is appointed an enemy of God.
Or do you think that the Scripture says in vain, “The Spirit that He has made to dwell in us yearns with envy”?
But He gives greater grace. Therefore it says: “God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble.”
Therefore subject yourselves to God. But resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw near to God, and He will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and have purified hearts, you double-minded.
Be grieved and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and the joy to gloom.
Humble yourselves in the presence of the Lord, and He will exalt you.
Do not speak against one another, brothers. The one speaking against his brother or judging his brother speaks against the Law and judges the Law. But if you judge the Law, you are not a doer of the Law, but a judge.
There is one Lawgiver and Judge, the One being able to save and to destroy. But who are you judging the neighbor?
Come now, those saying, “Today or tomorrow we will go into this city, and will spend a year there, and will trade, and will make a profit,”
who know not what is on the next day. What is your life? It is just a vapor, appearing for a little while, and then vanishing.
Instead you ought to say, “If the Lord should will, both we will live and we will do this or that.”
But now you boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil.
Therefore to the one knowing to do good, and not doing, it is sin.
Come now, you rich, weep, wailing over the miseries that are coming upon you.
Your riches have rotted, and your garments have become moth-eaten.
Your gold and silver have corroded, and their rust will be for a testimony against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have treasured up in the last days.
Behold, the wage of the workmen having harvested your fields, having been kept back by you, cries out, and the cries of those having harvested have entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.
You lived in luxury and lived in self-indulgence upon the earth. You have fattened your hearts in the day of slaughter.
You have condemned and have put to death the righteous; he does not resist you.
Therefore be patient, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer awaits the precious fruit of the earth, being patient for it until it receives the early and latter rains.
You also be patient; strengthen your hearts, because the coming of the Lord has drawn near.
Do not grumble against one another, brothers, so that you may not be condemned. Behold, the Judge is standing before the doors.
Brothers as an example of suffering evils and of patience, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Behold, we count blessed those having persevered. You have heard of the perseverance of Job, and you have seen the outcome from the Lord, that the Lord is full of compassion and is merciful.
But before all things, my brothers, do not swear, neither by heaven, nor the earth, nor any other oath. But let your “Yes” be yes, and the “No,” no, so that you might not fall under judgment.
Is anyone among you suffering hardships? Let him pray. Is anyone cheerful? Let him sing praises.
Is anyone among you sick? Let him call near the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, having anointed him with oil in the name of the Lord.
And the prayer of faith will save the one ailing, and the Lord will raise him up, and if he might be one having committed sins, it will be forgiven him.
Therefore confess the sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man being made effective prevails much.
Elijah was a man of like nature to us, and with fervent prayer he prayed for it not to rain, and it did not rain upon the earth three years and six months.
And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth produced its fruit.
My brothers, if anyone among you might wander from the truth, and someone should bring him back,
let him know that the one having brought back a sinner from the error of his way will save his soul from death, and will cover over a multitude of sins.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To the elect sojourners of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by the sanctification of the Spirit unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: May grace and peace be multiplied to you.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the One according to His great mercy having begotten us again to a living hope, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ out from the dead,
to an inheritance imperishable and undefiled and unfading, being reserved in the heavens for you,
who are being guarded by the power of God through faith, for the salvation ready to be revealed in the last time,
in which you greatly rejoice, at present for a little while if it is being necessary, having been put to grief by various trials,
so that the proven genuineness of your faith, more precious than gold, perishing though being refined by fire, may be discovered to result in praise and glory and honor in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
whom not having seen you love, on whom now believing though not seeing you also exult with joy inexpressible and filled with glory,
receiving the outcome of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
Concerning this salvation, the prophets sought out and searched out diligently, having prophesied of the grace toward you,
inquiring into what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ in them was signifying, testifying beforehand of the sufferings of Christ and the glories after these,
to whom it was revealed that they were serving not themselves, but you, in those things which now have been proclaimed to you by those having proclaimed the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit having been sent from heaven, into which angels desire to look.
Therefore having girded up the loins of your mind, being sober-minded, set your hope fully upon the grace being brought to you in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
as children of obedience, not being conformed to the passions in your former ignorance.
But as the One having called you is holy, be holy yourselves also in all your conduct,
because it has been written: “You shall be holy, because I am holy.”
And if you call on as Father the One judging impartially according to the work of each, conduct yourselves in fear during the time of your sojourn,
knowing that you were redeemed from your futile manner of life handed down from your fathers, not by perishable things—by silver or by gold—
but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot,
having been foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but having been revealed in the last times for the sake of you,
who by Him believe in God, the one having raised Him up out from the dead and having given Him glory, so as for your faith and hope to be in God.
Having purified your souls in obedience to the truth unto sincere brotherly love, love one another fervently, out of a pure heart,
having been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, by the living and abiding word of God,
because, “All flesh is like grass, and all the glory of it like the flower of grass. The grass withers, and the flower falls away,
but the word of the Lord abides to the age.” And this is the word having been proclaimed to you.
Therefore having put aside all malice, and all deceit, and hypocrisy, and envies, and all evil speakings,
like newborn babies, crave pure reasonable milk, so that by it you may grow up in respect to salvation,
if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is good.
Coming to Him, a living stone, indeed rejected by men, but chosen and precious in the sight of God,
you yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up as a spiritual house into a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Therefore it is contained in Scripture: “Behold, I lay in Zion a stone, a chosen precious cornerstone; and the one believing on Him, shall not be put to shame.”
Therefore the preciousness is to you believing. But to those disobeying, “The stone which those building have rejected, this has become into the head of the corner,”
and, “A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” They stumble at being disobedient to the word, to which also they were appointed.
But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for His possession, so that you may proclaim the excellencies of the One having called you out of darkness into His marvelous light,
who once were not a people, but now are the people of God; those not having received mercy, but now having received mercy.
Beloved, I exhort you as aliens and sojourners, to abstain from fleshly desires, which war against the soul,
keeping your conduct among the Gentiles honorable, so that wherein which they speak against you as evildoers, through having witnessed the good deeds, they may glorify God in the day of visitation.
Be in subjection to every human institution for the sake of the Lord, whether to the king as being supreme,
or to governors as being sent by him for vengeance to evildoers and praise to well doers,
because the will of God is this: doing good, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
as free, and not having the freedom as a cover-up for evil, but as servants of God.
Honor everyone: love the brotherhood, fear God, Honor the king.
Servants, be subject to masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the unreasonable.
For this is acceptable, if for sake of conscience toward God, anyone endures griefs, suffering unjustly.
For what kind of credit is it, if sinning and being struck, you shall endure? But if you shall endure doing good and suffering, this is commendable before God.
For to this hereunto you have been called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example that you should follow after His steps:
“Who committed no sin, neither was deceit found in His mouth.”
Who being reviled did not retaliate; suffering did not threaten, but He gave Himself over to Him judging justly.
Who Himself bore our sins in His body on the tree, so that, having been dead to sins, we might live to righteousness. “By whose scourge marks you have been healed.”
For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
Likewise wives, be subject to the own husbands so that, even if any are disobedient to the word, they will be won over without word by the conduct of the wives,
having witnessed your respectful, pure conduct,
whose adorning let not be the external, of braiding of hair and putting around of gold, or putting on of garments,
but the hidden man of the heart, in the imperishable of the gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth before God.
For in this way formerly, the holy women also hoping in God used to adorn themselves, being subject to the own husbands,
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, of whom you have become children, doing good and not fearing any consternation.
Husbands do likewise, dwelling with them according to knowledge, as with a weaker vessel, with the female, rendering honor as joint-heirs also of the grace of life, so as for your prayers not to be hindered.
Now the end: All be single-minded, sympathetic, loving as brothers, tender-hearted, humble,
not repaying evil for evil or insult for insult; but on the contrary blessing, because to this you were called, so that you should inherit blessing.
For, “The one desiring to love life, and to see good days, let him keep the tongue from evil, and lips not to speak deceit.
Also let him turn away from evil, and let him do good. Let him seek peace and let him pursue it.
Because the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and His ears toward their prayer. But the face of the Lord is against those doing evil.”
And who is he who will harm you, if you should be zealous for that which is good?
But even if you should suffer because of righteousness, you are blessed. “And you should not be afraid of their threats, neither should you be troubled.”
But in your hearts sanctify Christ as Lord, always ready for a defense to everyone asking you an account concerning the hope in you; yet with gentleness and fear,
having a good conscience, so that in the case that they might speak against you, those reviling your good manner of life in Christ, they shall be ashamed.
For it is better to suffer for doing good, if the will of God wills it, than doing evil,
because Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, so that He might bring you to God, having been put to death indeed in the flesh, but having been made alive in the spirit,
in which also having gone, He preached to the spirits in prison
at one time having disobeyed, when the longsuffering of God was waiting in the days of Noah, of the ark being prepared, in which a few—that is, eight souls—were saved through water,
which also prefigures the baptism now saving you, not a putting away of the filth of flesh, but the demand of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers having been subjected to Him.
Therefore Christ having suffered in the flesh, you also arm yourselves with the same mind, because the one having suffered in the flesh is done with sin,
so as to live the remaining time in the flesh no longer to men’s desires, but to the will of God.
For the time past is sufficient to have carried out the desire of the Gentiles, having walked in sensuality, lusts, drunkenness, orgies, carousing, and abominable idolatries.
With respect to this, they think it strange of you not running with them into the same overflow of debauchery, speaking evil of you,
who will give account to Him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
For to this end the gospel was proclaimed even to the dead, so that they might be judged indeed according to men in the flesh, but they might live in the spirit according to God.
Now the end of all has drawn near. Therefore be clear minded and be sober for the purpose of prayers,
above all things, having fervent love among yourselves, because love covers over a multitude of sins,
hospitable to one another without complaint,
as each has received a gift, to them serving each other as good stewards of the manifold grace of God:
if anyone speaks, as oracles of God; if anyone serves, as of strength which God supplies, so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the power to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Beloved, do not be surprised at the fire among you taking place for a trial to you, as if a strange thing were happening to you.
But as you have shared in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, so that also in the revelation of His glory you may rejoice, exulting.
If you are insulted in the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.
For let not any of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evildoer, or as a troublesome meddler,
but if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this name.
For it is the time for the judgment to have begun from the house of God; and if from us first, what will be the outcome of those disobeying the gospel of God?
And, “If the righteous one is saved with difficulty, where will appear the ungodly and sinner?”
Therefore also, those suffering according to the will of God, let them commit their souls to the faithful Creator in well doing.
I exhort the elders among you, a fellow elder and witness of the sufferings of Christ, who am also a partaker of the glory being about to be revealed:
Shepherd the flock of God among you, exercising oversight not under compulsion, but willingly according to God; and not for base gain but eagerly,
not as exercising lordship over those in your charge, but being examples to the flock.
And the Chief Shepherd having been revealed, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.
Likewise, younger ones, be subject to your elders. And all, gird on humility one to another, because, “God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble.”
Be humbled therefore under the mighty hand of God, so that He may exalt you in due time,
having cast all your anxiety upon Him, because with Him there is care about you.
Be sober-minded; watch. Your adversary the devil prowls about as a roaring lion seeking whom to devour,
whom you should resist, firm in the faith, knowing the same sufferings to be accomplished in your brotherhood throughout the world.
And the God of all grace, the One having called you to His eternal glory in Christ, of you having suffered a little while, He Himself will perfect, will confirm, will strengthen, and will establish you.
To Him be the power to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Through Silvanus, the faithful brother as I regard him, I have written to you through few words, exhorting and testifying this to be the true grace of God, in which you stand.
She in Babylon elected with you greets you, and my son Mark.
Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace be to all of you who are in Christ.
Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, To those having obtained a faith equally precious with ours, through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ:
Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
Accordingly, His divine power has given us all things toward life and godliness, through the knowledge of the One having called us by His own glory and excellence,
through which He has given to us the precious and magnificent promises, so that through these you might become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the decay in the world in desire.
Now also for this very reason, having brought in all earnestness, supplement into your faith virtue, and into virtue knowledge,
and into knowledge self-control, and into self-control endurance, and into endurance godliness,
and into godliness brotherly affection, and into brotherly affection love.
For these things being in you and abounding, make you neither idle nor unfruitful as to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For in whomever these things are not present, he is blind, being short sighted, having received forgetfulness of the purification from his former sins.
Therefore, brothers, be diligent, rather, to make your calling and election sure. For practicing these things, never at any time shall you stumble.
For in this way the entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will be richly supplied to you.
Therefore I will be ready always to remind you concerning these things, though knowing them and having been strengthened in the truth being present in you.
Now I esteem it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance,
knowing that the putting off of my tabernacle is impending, as also our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.
And I will be diligent also for you to have at every time after my departure these things, to make a lasting remembrance.
For we have not made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ having followed out cleverly devised fables, but having been eyewitnesses of His majesty.
For having received honor and glory from God the Father, a voice such as follows was brought to Him by the Majestic Glory: “This is My Son, My beloved, in whom I have found delight.”
And we heard this voice having been brought from heaven, being with Him in the holy mountain.
And we have the more certain prophetic word, to which you do well taking heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until this day shall have dawned and the morning star shall have arisen in your hearts,
knowing this first, that any prophecy of Scripture is not of its own interpretation.
For no prophecy at any time was brought by the will of man, but men spoke from God, being carried by the Holy Spirit.
But there were also false prophets among the people, as there will be false teachers among you also, who will stealthily introduce destructive heresies, even denying the Master having bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
And many will follow after their sensuality, through whom the way of the truth will be maligned.
And through covetousness they will exploit you with fabricated words, for whom the judgment of long ago is not idle, and their destruction does not slumber.
For if God did not spare the angels having sinned, but having cast them down to Tartarus, in chains of gloomy darkness, delivered them, being kept for judgment;
and He did not spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah, a herald of righteousness, one of eight, having brought the flood upon the world of the ungodly;
and He condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction, having reduced them to ashes, having set an example of what is coming on the ungodly;
and He rescued righteous Lot, being distressed by the conduct in sensuality of the lawless
(for that righteous man dwelling, among them, day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul, through seeing and hearing their lawless deeds)—
then the Lord knows to deliver the devout out of temptation and to keep the unrighteous being punished unto the day of judgment,
and especially those walking after the flesh in the passion of defilement and despising authority. Bold, self-willed, they do not tremble blaspheming glorious ones,
whereas angels, being greater in strength and power, do not bring against them a reviling judgment before the Lord.
But these, like irrational animals, having been born as creatures of instinct for capture and destruction, blaspheming in what they are ignorant of, in their destruction also will be destroyed,
suffering wrong as the wage of unrighteousness; esteeming carousal in daytime as pleasure; blots and blemishes, reveling in their deceptions, feasting with you;
having eyes full of adultery, and unceasing from sin; enticing unestablished souls; having a heart having been exercised in craving—children of a curse!
Having forsaken the straight way, they have gone astray, having followed in the way of Balaam son of Bosor, who loved the wage of unrighteousness.
But he had reproof for his own transgression by a mute donkey; having spoken in a man’s voice, it restrained the madness of the prophet.
These are springs without water and mists being driven by storm, for whom gloom of darkness has been reserved.
For speaking arrogant words of vanity, they entice to sensuality with the passions of the flesh those barely escaping from those living in error,
promising them freedom, themselves being slaves of corruption. For by what anyone has been subdued, by that also he is enslaved.
For if, having escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, now again having been entangled in these they are subdued, the last state has become worse to them than the first.
For it would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than having known it, to have turned from the holy commandment having been delivered to them.
The thing true of the proverb has happened to them: “A dog having returned to its own vomit,” and, “A sow having washed, to her rolling place in the mire.”
Beloved, this is now the second letter I am writing to you, in both of which I am stirring up your pure mind in putting you in remembrance
to be mindful of the words having been spoken beforehand by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles,
first knowing this, that in the last days scoffers will come with scoffing, following according to their own evil desires,
and saying, “Where is the promise of His coming? For from the time that the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of creation.”
For this is concealed from them willingly, that heavens existed long ago and the earth, having been composed out of water and through water, by the word of God,
through which the world at that time perished, having been deluged with water.
But by the same word now the heavens and the earth exist, having been stored up for fire, being kept unto the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.
But beloved, do not let this one thing be hidden from you, that with the Lord one day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years like one day.
The Lord does not delay the promise, as some esteem slowness, but is patient toward you, not willing for any to perish, but all to come to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come like a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with a roar, and elements will be dissolved, burning with heat, and the earth and the works in it will not be found.
All these things being dissolved in this way, what kind ought you to be? In holy conduct and godliness,
expecting and hastening the coming of the day of God, by reason of which the heavens will be dissolved, being set on fire, and the elements are melting, burning with heat.
But according to His promise, we are awaiting new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells.
Therefore, beloved, expecting these things, be diligent to be found by Him in peace, without spot and without blemish.
And esteem the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also wrote to you according to the wisdom having been given to him,
as also in all the letters, speaking in them concerning these things, among which some things are difficult to be understood, which the ignorant and unestablished distort to their own destruction, as also the other Scriptures.
Therefore beloved, knowing this beforehand, you beware, lest you should fall from the own steadfastness, having been led away by the error of the lawless.
But grow in grace and in knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To Him be the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.
That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we have gazed upon, and our hands have handled, concerning the Word of life—
and the life was made manifest, and we have seen and bear witness, and proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was revealed to us—
that which we have seen and have heard, we proclaim to you also, so that you also may have fellowship with us. And indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ.
And these things we write, so that our joy might be complete.
And this is the message that we have heard from Him and we preach to you, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all.
If we should say that we have fellowship with Him, and yet should walk in the darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth.
But if we should walk in the light as He is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus His Son cleanses us from all sin.
If we should say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
If we should confess our sins, He is faithful and just, that He may forgive us our sins and might cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we should say that we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us.
My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you might not sin. And if anyone should sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous One.
And He is the propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours, but also for those of the whole world.
And by this we know that we have come to know Him, if we should keep His commandments.
The one saying, “I have known Him,” and not keeping His commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
But whoever may keep His word, truly in him the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in Him:
The one claiming to abide in Him ought also walk just as in the same way that He walked.
Beloved, I am not writing a new commandment to you, but an old commandment, which you have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have heard.
Again, I am writing a new commandment to you, which is true in Him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light already shines.
The one claiming to be in the light and hating his brother is in the darkness even until now.
The one loving his brother abides in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling.
But the one hating his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness; and he knows not where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
I am writing to you, little children, because the sins have been forgiven you for the sake of His name.
I am writing to you, fathers because you have known Him who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I have written to you, little children, because you know the Father.
I have written to you, fathers, because you know Him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
Do not love the world nor the things in the world. If anyone should love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
because all that is in the world, the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the vaunting of life, is not from the Father, but is from the world.
And the world is passing away, and its desire; but the one doing the will of God abides to the age.
Little children, it is the last hour, and as you have heard that antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have arisen, whereby we know that it is the last hour.
They went out from among us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us. But it is so that it might be made manifest that they are not all of us.
And you have the anointing from the Holy One, and all of you know.
I have not written to you because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because any lie is not of the truth.
Who is the liar, except the one denying that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, the one denying the Father and the Son.
Everyone denying the Son does not have the Father. The one confessing the Son has the Father also.
You, let what you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If what you have heard from the beginning should abide in you, you also will abide in the Son and in the Father.
And this is the promise that He promised us: eternal life.
I have written these things to you concerning those leading you astray.
And you, the anointing that you received from Him abides in you, and you have no need that anyone should teach you. But just as the same anointing teaches you concerning all things and is true and is no lie, and just as it has taught you, you shall abide in Him.
And now, little children, abide in Him, so that when He appears we might have boldness and not shrink away from Him in shame at His coming.
If you know that He is righteous, you know also that everyone practicing righteousness has been begotten of Him.
Behold what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of God—and we are! Because of this, the world does not know us, because it did not know Him.
Beloved, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. We know that when He appears, we will be like Him, for we will see Him as He is.
And everyone having this hope in Him purifies himself, just as He is pure.
Everyone committing sin also commits lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness.
And you know that He appeared, so that He might take away sins; and in Him there is no sin.
Anyone abiding in Him does not sin; anyone sinning has not seen Him, nor has he known Him.
Little children, let no one lead you astray; the one practicing righteousness is righteous, just as He is righteous.
The one practicing sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this reason the Son of God was revealed, so that He might destroy the works of the devil.
Anyone having been born of God does not practice sin, because His seed abides in him, and he is not able to continue sinning, because he has been born of God.
Through this, the children of God and the children of the devil are manifest: anyone not practicing righteousness is not of God, and also the one not loving his brother.
For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another,
not as Cain, who was of the evil one and slew his brother. And why did he slay him? Because his works were evil, but those of his brother, righteous.
And do not be surprised, brothers, if the world hates you.
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love our brothers. The one not loving abides in death.
Everyone hating his brother is a murderer; and you know that any murderer does not have eternal life abiding in him.
By this we have known love, because He laid down His life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
Now whoever might have the world’s goods, and might see his brother having need, and might close up his heart from him, how does the love of God abide in him?
Little children, we should love not in word, nor in tongue, but in action and in truth.
And by this we will know that we are of the truth, and we will assure our heart before Him,
that if our heart should condemn us, that God is greater than our heart, and He knows all things.
Beloved, if our heart should not condemn us, we have confidence toward God,
and whatever we might ask, we receive from Him, because we keep His commandments and we do the things pleasing before Him.
And this is His commandment, that we should believe in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ, and we should love one another, just as He gave the commandment to us.
And the one keeping His commandments abides in Him, and He in him. And by this we know that He abides in us: by the Spirit whom He has given to us.
Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
By this you know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ having come in the flesh is of God,
and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not of God, and this is that of the antichrist, which you heard that is coming, and now is already in the world.
You are of God, little children, and have overcome them, because the One in you is greater than the one in the world.
They are of the world; because of this they speak from out of the world, and the world listens to them.
We are of God. The one knowing God listens to us. He who is not of God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of falsehood.
Beloved, we should love one another, because love is from God; and everyone loving has been born from God and knows God.
The one not loving has not known God, because God is love.
In this the love of God has been revealed among us, that God has sent His only begotten Son into the world, so that we might live through Him.
In this is love, not that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent His Son as a propitiation for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
No one has seen God at any time; if we should love one another, God abides in us, and His love is having been perfected in us.
By this we know that we abide in Him and He in us: because He has given to us from out of His Spirit.
And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son as Savior of the world.
Whoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
And we have come to know and have come to believe the love that God has as to us. God is love, and the one abiding in love abides in God, and God abides in him.
In this, love has been perfected with us, so that we may have confidence in the day of judgment that, just as He is, also are we in this world.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has punishment; and the one fearing has not been perfected in love.
We love because He first loved us.
If anyone should say, “I love God,” and should hate his brother, he is a liar. For the one not loving his brother, whom he has seen, is not able to love God, whom he has not seen.
And this commandment we have from Him, that the one loving God should love his brother also.
Everyone believing that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone loving the One having begotten Him also loves the one having been begotten from Him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep His commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we should keep His commandments; and His commandments are not burdensome.
For everyone having been born of God overcomes the world; and this is the victory having overcome the world: our faith.
Now who is the one overcoming the world, except the one believing that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is the One having come by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and by blood. And the Spirit is the One testifying, because the Spirit is the truth.
For there are three bearing testimony:
the Spirit and the water and the blood—and these are three in one.
If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater. For this is the testimony of God that He has testified concerning His Son.
The one believing in the Son of God has the testimony in himself; the one not believing God has made Him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified concerning His Son.
And this is the testimony: that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.
The one having the Son has life; the one not having the Son of God does not have life.
I have written these things to you, the ones believing in the name of the Son of God, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
And this is the confidence that we have toward Him, that if we might ask anything according to His will, He hears us.
And if we know that He hears us, whatever we might ask, we know that we have the requests that we have asked from Him.
If anyone should see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and He will give him life, to those sinning not unto death. There is a sin unto death; I do not say that he should implore concerning that.
All unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not unto death.
We know that everyone having been born of God does not continue to sin, but the One having been begotten of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him.
We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the evil one.
Now we know that the Son of God is come and has given us understanding, so that we may know Him who is true; and we are in Him who is true, in His Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
The elder, To the elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth, and not only I, but also all those having known the truth—
because of the truth abiding in us and that will be with us to the age:
Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I rejoiced exceedingly that I have found some of your children walking in truth, just as we have received a commandment from the Father.
And now I implore you, lady, not as though I am writing to you a new commandment, but that which we have had from the beginning, that we should love one another.
And this is love, that we should walk according to His commandments. This is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning, so that you should walk in it.
For many deceivers have entered into the world, those not confessing Jesus Christ coming in flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Watch yourselves, so that you should not lose what things we have worked for, but you may receive a full reward.
Anyone going on ahead, and not abiding in the teaching of Christ, does not have God. The one abiding in the teaching, this one has both the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into the house, and do not tell him to rejoice.
For the one telling him to rejoice partakes in his evil works.
Having many things to write to you, I purposed not with paper and ink, but I hope to come to you and to speak mouth to mouth, so that our joy may be having been completed.
The children of your elect sister greet you.
The elder, To Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
Beloved, I pray you to prosper concerning all things and to be in good health, just as your soul prospers.
For I rejoiced exceedingly of the brothers coming and bearing witness of your truth, just as you are walking in truth.
I have no greater joy than these things, that I should hear of my children walking in the truth.
Beloved, you are doing faithfully whatever you might have done toward the brothers, and they are strangers,
who testified of your love before the church, whom you will do well having set forward worthily of God.
For they went forth on behalf of the name, accepting nothing from the Gentiles.
Therefore we ought to receive such men, so that we may be fellow workers in the truth.
I have written something to the church; but Diotrephes, the one loving to be first among them, does not welcome us.
Because of this, if I might come, I will bring to remembrance his works which he is doing, speaking against us with evil words; and not being satisfied with these, neither he receives the brothers himself, and he forbids those purposing, and he casts them out from the church.
Beloved, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good. The one doing good is of God; the one doing evil has not seen God.
Witness has been given to Demetrius by all, and by the truth itself; and we also bear witness, and you know that our testimony is true.
I had many things to write to you, but I do not desire to write to you with ink and pen;
but I hope to see you soon, and we will speak mouth to mouth. Peace to you. The friends greet you. Greet the friends by name.
Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, To those called, having been loved in God the Father and having been kept in Jesus Christ.
Mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you.
Beloved, using all diligence to write to you concerning our common salvation, I had necessity to write to you, exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith having been delivered once for all to the saints.
For certain men came in stealthily, those having been designated long ago unto this condemnation, ungodly ones changing the grace of our God into sensuality and denying our only master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Now I want to remind you, you having known all this, that Jesus, having saved at one time a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward He destroyed those not having believed.
And the angels not having kept their own domain, but having abandoned the own dwelling, He keeps in eternal chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day;
just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, having indulged in sexual immorality and having gone after strange flesh, in like manner with them are set forth as an example, undergoing the penalty of eternal fire.
Yet likewise also these dreaming ones indeed defile the flesh, and set aside authority, and blaspheme glorious ones.
But Michael the archangel, when he was reasoning with the devil, disputing about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring against him a blasphemous judgment, but he said “The Lord rebuke you.”
But these indeed speak evil of whatever things they have not seen; and whatever things they understand naturally, as the irrational animals, in these things they corrupt themselves.
Woe to them, because they have gone in the way of Cain, and rushed for profit to the error of Balaam, and perished in the rebellion of Korah.
These are the hidden reefs, feasting together with you fearlessly in your love feasts; shepherding themselves; clouds without water, being carried about by winds; autumnal trees without fruit, twice having died, having been uprooted;
wild waves of the sea, foaming out of their own shame; wandering stars, to whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved to the age.
And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, also prophesied as to these, saying: “Behold, the Lord has come amidst myriads of His holy ones,
to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the ungodly concerning all the works of ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way, and concerning all the harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.”
These are grumblers, discontented, following after the own lusts; and their mouth speaks great swelling words, flattering faces for the sake of profit.
But you, beloved, remember the words having been spoken beforehand by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they were saying to you, “In the last time there will be scoffers, following after their own passions of ungodlinesses.”
These are those causing divisions, worldly-minded, not having the Spirit.
But you, beloved, building up yourselves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,
keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
And indeed have mercy on those who are doubting;
and save others, snatching them out of the fire; and show mercy to others with fear, hating even the clothing having been stained by the flesh.
Now to Him being able to keep you from stumbling and to present you blameless in the presence of His glory, with exultation—
to the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion, and authority, before all time and now and to all the ages. Amen.
The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave Him to show to His bond-servants what things it behooves to take place in quickness. And He signified it through having sent His angel to His servant, John,
who testified to the word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ, as much as he saw.
Blessed is the one reading, and those hearing the words of the prophecy, and keeping the things having been written in it; for the time is near.
John, To the seven churches in Asia: Grace to you and peace from Him being and who was and who is coming, and from the seven Spirits before His throne,
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To the One loving us and releasing us from our sins through His blood,
and He has made us a kingdom, priests to His God and Father—to Him be the glory and the dominion to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Behold, He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see Him, and those who pierced Him, and all the tribes of the earth will wail because of Him. Yes! Amen!
“I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says Lord God, the One being, and who was, and who is coming, the Almighty.
I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and perseverance in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos on account of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like that of a trumpet,
saying, “What you see, write in a book and send to the seven churches: to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamum, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.”
And I turned to see the voice that was speaking with me. And having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
and in the midst of the lampstands, One like the Son of Man, having been clothed to the feet, and having been girded about at the breasts with a golden sash.
Now His head and His hairs are white like wool, white as snow; and His eyes are like a flame of fire;
and His feet are like fine bronze, as having been refined in a furnace; and His voice is like the voice of many waters;
and He is holding in His right hand seven stars, and a sharp two-edged sword is going forth out of His mouth; and His face is like the sun shining in its full strength.
And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as though dead. And He placed His right hand upon me, saying, “Fear not. I am the First and the Last,
and the Living One. And I was dead, and behold I am living to the ages of the ages, and I have the keys of Death and of Hades.
Therefore write the things that you have seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to take place after these,
the mystery of the seven stars, which you saw on My right hand, and the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
To the messenger of the church in Ephesus write: These things says the One holding the seven stars in His right hand, walking in the midst of the seven golden lampstands.
I know your works and your labor and endurance, and that you are not able to tolerate evil ones. And you have tested those claiming to be apostles and are not, and you have found them false.
And you have perseverance, and have endured for the sake of My name, and have not grown weary.
But I have against you that you have abandoned your first love.
Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent, and do the first works. But if not, I am coming to you, and I will remove your lampstand out of its place, unless you should repent.
But you have this, that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one overcoming, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.
And to the messenger of the church in Smyrna write: These things says the First and the Last, who became dead and came to life.
I know your tribulation and poverty—but you are rich—and the blasphemy of those claiming themselves to be Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Do not fear what you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to cast some of you into prison, so that you might be tested; and you shall have tribulation ten days. Be faithful unto death, and I will give to you the crown of life.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one overcoming shall not be injured by the second death.
And to the messenger of the church in Pergamum write: These things says the One having the sharp two-edged sword.
I know where you dwell, where the throne of Satan is; and you hold fast to My name, and you have not denied My faith, even in the days of Antipas My witness, My faithful one, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
But I have a few things against you, because you have some there holding the teaching of Balaam, who would teach Balak to cast a snare before the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit sexual immorality.
So likewise you also have some holding the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
Therefore repent! But if not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will make war against them with the sword of My mouth.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one overcoming, I will give to him the manna having been hidden, and I will give to him a white stone, and on the stone new a name having been written, which no one has known, except the one receiving it.
And to the messenger of the church in Thyatira write: These things says the Son of God, the One having His eyes like a flame of fire, and His feet like burnished bronze.
I know your works, and your love and faith and service and perseverance; and your latter works are greater than the first.
But I have against you that you tolerate the woman Jezebel, the one calling herself a prophetess and teaching and misleading My servants to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
And I have given her time that she might repent, and she is not willing to repent of her sexual immorality.
Behold, I will cast her into a sickbed, and those committing adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they shall repent of her deeds.
And I will kill her children with death, and all the churches will know that I am the One searching affections and hearts; and I will give to each of you according to your works.
But I say to you, to the rest of those in Thyatira, as many as do not have this teaching, who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say: I will not cast upon you any other burden.
But hold fast to what you have until which time I might come.
And the one overcoming and keeping My works until the end, I will give to him authority over the nations,
and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of the potter are broken in pieces—just as I also have received from My Father.
And I will give to him the morning star.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the messenger of the church in Sardis write: These things says the One having the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars. I know your deeds, that you have the characterization that you are alive, and yet you are dead.
Be watching, and strengthen the things that remain, which are about to die; for I have not found your works having been completed in the sight of My God.
Remember, therefore, what you have received and heard—and keep it and repent. If therefore you shall not watch, I will come like a thief, and you shall not know at what hour I will come upon you.
But you have a few people in Sardis who have not soiled their garments, and they will walk with Me in white, because they are worthy.
The one overcoming thus will be clothed in white garments. And I will never blot out his name from the book of life, and I will confess his name before My Father and before His angels.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the messenger of the church in Philadelphia write: These things says the Holy One, the True One, having the key of David, the One opening and no one will shut, and shutting and no one opens.
I know your deeds. Behold, I have set before you a door having been opened, which no one is able to shut it, because you have little power, and yet you have kept My word and have not denied My name.
Behold, I give those from the synagogue of Satan—those declaring themselves to be Jews, and are not, but they lie—behold, I will cause them that they will come and will worship before your feet, and they shall know that I have loved you.
Because you have kept the word of My patient endurance, I also will keep you out of the hour of the trial being about to come upon the whole inhabited world, to try those dwelling upon the earth.
I am coming quickly. Hold fast to what you have, so that no one may take your crown.
The one overcoming, I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God, and he shall not go out anymore. And I will write upon him the name of My God, and the name of the city of My God, the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from My God, and My new name.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the messenger of the church in Laodicea write: These things says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the Beginning of God’s creation.
I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you would be cold or hot.
So because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I am about to spit you out of My mouth.
For you say, ‘I am rich, and I have grown rich, and I have need of nothing.’ And you do not realize that you are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.
I counsel you to buy from Me gold having been refined by fire so that you may be rich, and white garments so that you may be clothed and the shame your of nakedness might not be made manifest, and eye-salve to anoint your eyes so that you may see.
As many as I might love, I rebuke and discipline; therefore be zealous and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone should hear My voice and open the door, then I will come in to him and will dine with him, and he with Me.
The one overcoming, I will give to him to sit with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with My Father on His throne.
The one having an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”
After these things I looked, and behold, a door was standing open in heaven, and the first voice that I heard like a trumpet was speaking with me, saying, “Come up here, and I will show to you what it behooves to take place after these things.”
Immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, a throne was set in heaven, and One sitting upon the throne,
and the One sitting, in appearance was like jasper and carnelian stone. And a rainbow was around the throne, in appearance like an emerald.
And around the throne were twenty-four thrones; and sitting on the thrones twenty-four elders, having been clothed in white garments; and on their heads, golden crowns.
And out of the throne come flashes of lightning, and voices, and thunderings. And there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
And before the throne was something like a sea of glass, like crystal. And in the midst of the throne and around the throne were four living creatures, being full of eyes in front and behind.
And the first living creature was like a lion, and the second living creature like a calf, and the third living creature having the face as of a man, and the fourth living creature like an eagle flying.
And the four living creatures, each of them had six wings respectively, full of eyes all around and within; and they did not have rest day and night, saying: “Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, the One having been, and the One being, and the One coming.”
And whenever the living creatures will give glory and honor and thanksgiving to the One sitting upon the throne, the One living to the ages of the ages,
the twenty-four elders will fall before the One sitting upon the throne, and they will worship the One living to the ages of the ages, and they will cast their crowns before the throne, saying:
“Worthy are You, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power; for You created all things, and because of Your will, they existed and were created.”
And I saw on the right hand of the One sitting upon the throne a scroll, having been written inside and on the back, having been sealed with seven seals.
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming in a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll, and to break its seals?”
And no one in heaven, nor upon the earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the scroll, nor to see it.
And I was weeping loudly, because no one was found worthy to open the scroll, nor to see it.
And one of the elders says to me, “Do not weep. Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has overcome to open the scroll and its seven seals.”
And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing as having been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God having been sent out into all the earth.
And He came and took it out of the right hand of the One sitting on the throne.
And when He had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each having a harp, and golden bowls being full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints.
And they are singing a new song, saying, “Worthy are You to take the scroll and to open its seals, because You were slain, and You purchased to God by Your blood, out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation,
and You have made them a kingdom and priests to our God; and they will reign upon the earth.”
And I looked, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne, and of the living creatures, and of the elders; and their number was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands,
saying in a loud voice: “Worthy is the Lamb having been slain, to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing!”
And I heard every creature which is in heaven, and upon the earth, and under the earth, and on the sea, and everything in them, saying: “To the One sitting on the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing and honor and glory and might to the ages of the ages.”
And the four living creatures kept saying, “Amen.” And the elders fell down and worshiped.
And I watched when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, as a voice of thunder, “Come!”
And I looked, and behold, a white horse, and the one sitting on it having a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went forth overcoming, and that he might conquer.
And when He opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, “Come!”
And another horse went forth, bright red; and to the one sitting on it, to him was granted to take the peace from the earth, and that they will slay one another; and a great sword was given to him.
And when He opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come!” And I looked, and behold, a black horse, and the one sitting on it having a pair of scales in his hand.
And I heard something like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures, saying, “A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenixes of barley for a denarius; and you should not injure the oil and the wine.”
And when He opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, “Come!”
And I looked, and behold, a pale horse, and the one sitting on it, the name of him was Death, and Hades was following with him; and authority was given to them over the fourth of the earth, to kill with sword, and with famine, and with plague, and by the beasts of the earth.
And when He opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those having been slain because of the word of God, and because of the testimony which they had upheld.
And they were crying in a loud voice, saying, “Until when, O Lord, holy and true, do You not judge and avenge our blood from those dwelling upon the earth?”
And to each of them were given white robes, and it was said to them that they shall rest yet a little time, until their fellow servants would also be complete, and their brothers, those being about to be killed as they also had been.
And I saw when He opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole moon became like blood,
and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as a fig tree casts its unripe figs, being shaken by a great wind.
And heaven departed like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.
And the kings of the earth, and the great ones, and the commanders, and the rich, and the powerful, and every slave and free, hid themselves in the caves, and among the rocks of the mountains.
And they say to the mountains and to the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of the One sitting on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
because the great day of Their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”
After these things I saw four angels standing upon the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, so that no wind would blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
And I saw another angel, having ascended from the rising of the sun, having the seal of the living God. And he cried in a loud voice to the four angels to whom it had been given to them to harm the earth and the sea,
saying, “Do not harm the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we shall have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.”
And I heard the number of those having been sealed, one hundred forty-four thousand, having been sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
Out of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand having been sealed, out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Isaachar twelve thousand,
out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand having been sealed.
After these things I looked, and behold, a great multitude, which no one was able to number it, out of every nation, and tribes, and peoples, and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, having been clothed with white robes, and palm branches in their hands.
And they were crying out in a loud voice, saying: “Salvation to our God, the One sitting on the throne, and to the Lamb!”
And all the angels stood around the throne, and the elders, and the four living creatures, and they fell upon their faces before the throne and worshiped God,
saying, “Amen! Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and strength, to our God, to the ages of the ages! Amen.”
And one of the elders answered, saying to me, “These having been clothed with the white robes, who are they, and from where have they come?”
And I said to him, “My lord, you know.” And he said to me, “These are the ones coming out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Because of this, ‘They are before the throne of God, and serve Him day and night in His temple; and the One sitting on the throne will tabernacle over them.
they will not hunger any more, neither will they thirst anymore, nor shall the sun at all fall upon them, nor any scorching heat;
because the Lamb in the center of the throne will shepherd them, and He will lead them to fountains living of waters, and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.’”
And when He opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
And another angel having a golden censer came and stood at the altar, and much incense was given to him, that he will offer it with the prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar before the throne.
And the smoke of the incense went up before God, with the prayers of the saints, out of the hand of the angel.
And the angel took the censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar, and cast it to the earth; and there were thunders, and rumblings, and flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
And the seven angels having the seven trumpets prepared themselves, that they might sound the trumpets.
And the first sounded his trumpet, and there was hail and fire having been mixed with blood, and it was cast upon the earth. And a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.
And the second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea. And a third of the sea became blood,
and a third of the creatures having life in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.
And the third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star fell out of heaven, burning like a torch. And it fell upon a third of the rivers, and upon the springs of waters.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood. And a third of the waters became wormwood, and many of the men died from the waters, because they were made bitter.
And the fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them should be darkened, and the day should not appear for a third of it, and the night likewise.
And I looked, and I heard one eagle flying in mid-heaven, saying in a loud voice, “Woe! Woe! Woe to those dwelling on the earth, because of the remaining voices of the trumpet of the three angels being about to sound their trumpets!”
And the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star having fallen out of heaven to the earth, and the key of the pit of the abyss was given to it.
And he opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke went up out of the pit, like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke of the pit.
And out of the smoke, locusts came forth unto the earth, and power was given to them, like the scorpions of the earth have power.
And it was said to them that they shall not harm the grass of the earth, nor any green thing, nor any tree, but only the men not having the seal of God on the foreheads.
And it was granted to them that they should not kill them, but that they shall torment them five months. And their torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it might strike a man.
And in those days, men will seek death, and will not find it; and they will long to die, and death shall flee from them.
And the appearance of the locusts was like horses having been prepared for battle, and upon their heads were something like crowns, like gold; and their faces like the faces of men.
And they had hair like hair of women, and their teeth were like those of lions.
And they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots of horses rushing into battle.
And they have tails and stingers like scorpions, and their power to injure men for five months is in their tails.
They have a king over them, the angel of the abyss. His name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in the Greek, he has the name Apollyon.
The first woe has passed. Behold, two woes still are coming after these things.
And the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard one voice from the four horns of the golden altar before God,
saying to the sixth angel, the one having the trumpet, “Release the four angels, those having been bound at the great river Euphrates.”
And the four angels having been prepared for the hour and day and month and year were released, so that they might kill a third of mankind.
And the number of the armies of the cavalry was twice ten thousand ten thousands; I heard the number of them.
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those sitting on them, having fiery and hyacinthine and brimstone breastplates. And the heads of the horses were like heads of lions, and out of their mouths proceed fire and smoke and brimstone.
By these three plagues, a third of mankind was killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone proceeding out of their mouths.
For the powers of the horses are in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails are like serpents having heads, and with them they injure.
And the rest of the men who were not killed by these plagues did not even repent of the works of their hands so that they will not worship the demons, and the golden and silver and bronze and stone and wooden idols, which are able neither to see, nor to hear, nor to walk.
And they did not repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their sexual immorality, nor of their thefts.
And I saw another mighty angel coming down out of heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow upon his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire,
and having in his hand a little scroll being open. And he placed his right foot upon the sea, and the left upon the earth.
And he cried out in a loud voice as a lion roars. And when he cried out, the seven thunders sounded their voice.
And when the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to write. But I heard a voice out of heaven, saying, “Seal what the seven thunders have spoken, and do not write them.”
And the angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to heaven,
and he swore by the One living to the ages of the ages, who created heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, “There will be no more delay!
But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound the trumpet, then the mystery of God would be completed, as proclaimed to His servants, the prophets.”
And the voice that I heard out of heaven was speaking with me again and saying, “Go, take the little scroll having been opened in the hand of the angel standing upon the sea and upon the land.”
And I went to the angel, saying to him, “Give me the little scroll.” And he says to me, “Take and eat it; and your stomach it will make bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.”
And I took the little scroll out of the hand of the angel, and I ate it; and it was sweet as honey in my mouth; and when I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
And they say to me, “It is necessary for you to prophesy again concerning many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.”
And a measuring rod like a staff was given to me, saying, “Rise and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and those worshiping in it.
And leave out the courtyard outside the temple, and do not measure it, because it has been given up to the nations, and they will trample upon the holy city forty and two months.
And I will grant to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy a thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.”
These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands standing before the Lord of the earth.
And if anyone should desire to harm them, fire goes out of their mouth and devours their enemies. And if anyone should desire to harm them, thus it is necessary for him to be killed.
These have the power to shut the sky, so that no rain shall fall in the days of their prophecy; and they have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they might desire.
And when they shall have completed their testimony, the beast coming up out of the abyss will make war with them, and will overcome them, and will kill them.
And their body will be upon the street of the great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations gaze upon their bodies three and a half days, and they will not allow their bodies to be put into a tomb.
And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and make merry, and will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets have tormented those dwelling upon the earth.
And after the three and a half days, the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon those beholding them.
And they heard a great voice out of heaven, saying to them, “Come up here.” And they went up to heaven in the cloud, and their enemies beheld them.
And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell, and seven thousand names of men were killed in the earthquake. And the rest became terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe has passed. Behold, the third woe is coming quickly.
And the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were great voices in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become that of our Lord and of His Christ, and He will reign to the ages of the ages.”
And the twenty-four elders sitting on their thrones before God fell upon their faces and worshiped God,
saying: “We give thanks to You, Lord God Almighty, the One being and who was, that You have taken Your great power and have begun to reign.
And the nations were enraged, and Your wrath came, and the time for the dead to be judged, and to give the reward to Your servants, the prophets, and to the saints, and to those fearing Your name, the small and the great, and to destroy those who are destroying the earth.”
And the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of His covenant was seen in His temple. And there were flashes of lightning, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail.
And a great sign was seen in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars,
and having in womb. And she cries out, being in travail, and being in pain to bring forth.
And another sign was seen in heaven, and behold, a great red dragon having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his heads, seven diadems.
And his tail drags a third of the stars of heaven, and he cast them to the earth. And the dragon stands before the woman being about to bring forth, so that when she should bring forth, he might devour her child.
And she brought forth a male son, who is about to shepherd all the nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up to God, and to His throne.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place having been prepared there by God, so that they should nourish her there one thousand two hundred sixty days.
And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels warred against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels warred back.
And he did not have strength, nor was found a place for them any longer in heaven.
And the great dragon was thrown out, the ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, deceiving the whole inhabited world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
And I heard a great voice in heaven, saying: “Now the salvation, and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of His Christ have come, because the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, the one accusing them before our God day and night.
And they have overcome him by reason of the blood of the Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony; and they have not loved their life unto death.
Because of this, rejoice O heavens, and those dwelling in them! Woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has come down to you, having great fury, knowing that he has a short time.”
And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he persecuted the woman who had brought forth the male child.
And the two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she could fly from the face of the serpent into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished there a time, and times, and half a time.
And out of his mouth the serpent cast water as a river after the woman, so that he might cause her to be carried away by a flood.
And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river, which the dragon had cast out of his mouth.
And the dragon was angry with the woman, and he went to make to war with the rest of her children keeping the commandments of God and holding the testimony of Jesus. And he stood upon the sand of the sea.
And I saw rising out of the sea a beast, having ten horns, and seven heads, and on its horns, ten diadems, and upon its heads, names of blasphemy.
And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, and its feet like a bear’s, and its mouth like the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave to it his power, and his throne, and great authority.
And one of its heads was as having been slain to death. And its wound of death was healed, and the whole earth marveled after the beast.
And they worshiped the dragon, who had given authority to the beast; and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast? And who is able to make war against it?”
And a mouth was given to it, speaking great things and blasphemy, and it was given authority to act forty and two months.
And it opened its mouth unto blasphemies against God, to blaspheme His name and His tabernacle, those dwelling in heaven.
And there was given to it to make war with the saints, and to overcome them. And authority was given to it over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
And all dwelling on the earth will worship it, of whom their names have not been written from the founding of the world in the book of life of the Lamb having been slain.
If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
“If anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity he goes; If anyone is to be killed with the sword, by the sword it is necessary for him to be killed.” Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.
And I saw another beast rising out of the earth, and it had two horns like a lamb, and it was speaking like a dragon.
And it exercises all the authority of the first beast in the presence of it, and causes the earth and those dwelling in it, that they will worship the first beast, of whom its fatal wound had been healed.
And it works great signs, so that it should even cause fire out of heaven to come down to the earth in the presence of men.
And it deceives those dwelling on the earth, by reason of the signs that were given to it to perform before the beast, telling those dwelling on the earth to make an image to the beast that has the wound of the sword and has lived.
And there was given to it to give breath to the image of the beast, so that image of the beast also should speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast would be killed.
And it causes all the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the servants, that it should give them a mark on their right hand or on their forehead,
and that no one should be able to buy or to sell, if not the one having the mark—the name of the beast, or the number of its name.
Here is the wisdom. The one having understanding, let him count the number of the beast, for it is a man’s number, and its number is six hundred sixty-six.
And I looked, and behold, the Lamb was standing upon Mount Zion, and with Him one hundred forty-four thousand having His name and the name of His Father having been written on their foreheads.
And I heard a voice out of heaven like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of loud thunder. And the voice that I heard was like that of harpists harping with their harps.
And they are singing as a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures, and the elders. And no one was able to learn the song, except the one hundred forty-four thousand having been redeemed from the earth.
These are they who have not been defiled with women; for they are pure, these following the Lamb wherever He shall go. These have been redeemed out from men as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb.
And in their mouth no lie was not found; they are blameless.
And I saw another angel flying in mid-heaven, having the everlasting glad tidings to preach upon those dwelling on the earth, and upon every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
saying in a loud voice, “Fear God and give Him glory, because the hour of His judgment has come. And worship the One having made heaven, and the earth, and sea, and springs of waters.”
And another, a second angel, followed, saying, “Fallen, Fallen is Babylon the great, who has given all the Gentiles to drink of the wine of the passion of her immorality.”
And another, a third angel, followed them, saying in loud a voice, “If anyone worships the beast and its image, and receives a mark on his forehead or upon his hand,
he also will drink of the wine of the anger of God, having been mixed undiluted in the cup of His wrath; and he will be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy angels and before the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment goes up to ages of ages; and those worshiping the beast and its image have no rest day and night, and if anyone receives the mark of its name.”
Here is the endurance of the saints, those keeping the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
And I heard a voice out of heaven, saying “Write, ‘Blessed are the dead dying in the Lord from now on.’” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “so that they will rest from their labors; for their works follow with them.”
And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud is sitting One like the Son of Man, having on His head a golden crown, and in His hand a sharp sickle.
And another angel came out of the temple, crying in a loud voice to the One sitting on the cloud, “Put forth Your sickle and reap, because the hour to reap has come, because the harvest of the earth has ripened.”
And the One sitting upon the cloud put forth His sickle upon the earth, and the earth was harvested.
And another angel came out of the temple in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.
And another angel having authority over the fire came out of the altar, and he called in a loud cry to the one having the sharp sickle, saying, “Put forth your sharp sickle, and gather the clusters from the vine of the earth, because its grapes have fully ripened.”
And the angel put forth his sickle to the earth and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast them into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
And the winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood flowed out of the winepress, as high as the bridles of the horses, to the distance of one thousand six hundred stadia.
And I saw another great and wonderful sign in heaven: seven angels, having seven plagues—the last, because in them the wrath of God was completed.
And I saw something like a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those conquering over the beast, and over its image, and over the number of its name, standing upon the sea of glass, having harps of God.
And they are singing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, “Great and wonderful are Your works, Lord God the Almighty! Righteous and true are Your ways, O King of the nations!
Who should not fear You, O Lord, and will glorify Your name? For You alone are holy. For all the nations will come and will worship before You, because Your righteous acts have been revealed.”
And after these things I looked, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.
And the seven angels having the seven plagues came forth out of the temple, having been clothed in pure, bright linen, and having been girded with golden sashes around the chests.
And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, the One living to the ages of the ages.
And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from His power; and no one was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
And I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go and pour out into the earth the seven bowls of the wrath of God.”
And the first departed and poured out his bowl into the earth, and an evil and grievous sore came upon the men having the mark of the beast and those worshiping its image.
And the second poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood, as of one dead; and every living soul that was in the sea died.
And the third poured out his bowl into the rivers and the springs of the waters, and they became blood.
And I heard the angel of the waters saying: “Righteous are You the One being, and having been, O holy One, because You have judged these things,
because they have poured out the blood of saints and of prophets, and You have given to them blood to drink, they are worthy.”
And I heard the altar saying: “Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are Your judgments.”
And the fourth poured out his bowl upon the sun, and there was given to it to scorch men with fire.
And the men were scorched with great heat, and they blasphemed the name of God, the One having authority over these plagues; and they did not repent to give Him glory.
And the fifth poured out his bowl upon the throne of the beast, and its kingdom became darkened, and they were gnawing their tongues for the distress,
and they blasphemed the God of heaven on account of their distresses, and on account of their sores; and they did not repent of their deeds.
And the sixth poured out his bowl upon the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up, so that the way might be prepared of the kings of the rising of the sun.
And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, like frogs;
for they are spirits of demons, performing signs, which go forth to the kings of the whole inhabited world, to gather them together unto the battle of the great day of God the Almighty.
“Behold, I am coming like a thief. Blessed is the one watching and keeping his garments, so that he should not walk naked and they might see his shame.”
And he gathered them together unto the place called in Hebrew Armageddon.
And the seventh poured out his bowl upon the air, and a loud voice came out from the temple, from the throne, saying, “It is done!”
And there were flashes of lightning, and voices, and thunders; and there was a great earthquake, such as there had not been since men were upon the earth—so great was the earthquake, so mighty,
and the great city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell, and Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of the wine of the fury of His wrath.
And every island fled, and mountains were not to be found.
And a great hail, about a talent weight, comes down out of heaven upon the men. And the men blasphemed God on account of the plague of the hail, for the plague of it is exceedingly severe.
And one of the seven angels having the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, “Come here, I will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, the one sitting upon many waters,
with whom the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality, and those dwelling on the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.”
And he carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness, and I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet beast being full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
And the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls, holding a golden cup in her hand, being full of abominations and the impurity of her sexual immorality.
And upon her forehead a name was written, a mystery: Babylon the Great, the mother of the prostitutes, and of the abominations of the earth.
And I saw the woman being drunk with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And having seen her, I marveled with great wonder.
And the angel said to me, “Why did you marvel? I will tell you the mystery of the woman, and of the beast carrying her, having the seven heads and the ten horns.
The beast that you saw was, and is not, and is about to come up out of the abyss and go into destruction; and those dwelling on the earth whose names are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will wonder, seeing the beast which was, and is not, and yet will be.
Here is the mind having wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains, where the woman sits on them;
and there are seven kings. The five are fallen, the one is, the other has not yet come; and when he shall have come, it behooves him to remain a little while.
And the beast which was, and is not, is also himself an eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into destruction.
And the ten horns which you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but receive authority as kings one hour, along with the beast.
These have one mind, and they shall give up their power and authority to the beast.
These will make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, because He is Lord of lords and King of kings; and those with Him are called and chosen and faithful.”
And he says to me, “The waters that you saw where the prostitute sits are peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues.
And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast, these will hate the prostitute, and will make her desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh, and will burn her with fire.
For God has put into their hearts to accomplish His purpose, and to do one purpose, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God will be fulfilled.
And the woman whom you saw is the great city, having kingship over the kings of the earth.”
After these things I saw another angel descending out of heaven, having great authority; and the earth was illuminated from his glory.
And he cried out in a mighty voice, saying: “Fallen, Fallen is Babylon the great! And she has become a habitation of demons, and a prison of every unclean spirit, and a prison of every unclean bird, and a prison of every unclean creature also having been hated.
For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality; and the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality with her; and the merchants of the earth have been enriched through the power of her luxury.”
And I heard another voice from heaven, saying: “Come out of her, my people, so that you may not have fellowship in her sins, and so that you may not receive of her plagues.
For her sins have been heaped as high as heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Give back to her as she also has rendered; and pay back double to her, twofold according to her works. In the cup which she has mixed, mix double to her.
So much as she has glorified herself and lived in luxury, give to her as much torment and misery, because in her heart she says, ‘I sit as a queen, and I am never a widow, and never shall I see mourning.’
Because of this, her plagues will come in one day, death and misery and famine, and she will be burned up with fire, because mighty is the Lord God, the One having judged her.”
And the kings of the earth, the ones having committed sexual immorality and having lived luxuriously with her, will weep and will wail for her when they see the smoke of her burning,
standing from afar because of the fear of her torment, saying: “Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon, the strong city! For in one hour your judgment has come.”
And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn for her, because no one buys their cargo any longer—
cargo of gold, and of silver, and of precious stone, and of pearls; and of fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of scarlet; and all thyine wood and of every article of ivory and every article of most precious wood; and of bronze, and of iron, and of marble;
and cinnamon, and spice, and incense, and myrrh, and frankincense; and wine, and oil, and finest flour, and wheat; and cattle, and sheep, and of horses, and of chariots; and of slaves and souls of men.
“And the ripe fruits of the desire of your soul are departed from you, and all the sumptuous things and the splendid things have departed from you, and they will not find them any longer.”
The merchants of these things having been enriched from her will stand from afar, weeping and mourning because of the fear of her torment,
saying: “Woe, woe, the great city, having been clothed with fine linen and purple and scarlet, and having been adorned with gold and precious stone and pearl!
For in one hour such great wealth has been brought to desolation.” And every shipmaster, and all those sailing to a place, and sailors, and as many as trade by the sea, stood at a distance,
and were crying out, seeing the smoke of her burning, saying, ‘What is like the great city?’
And they cast dust upon their heads, and they were crying out, weeping and mourning, saying: “Woe, woe, the great city, in which all those having ships in the sea were enriched through her wealth! For in one hour she has been brought to desolation.”
“Rejoice over her, O heaven, and you saints and apostles and prophets, because God has judged for you the judgment against her.”
And one mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying: “Thus Babylon will be cast down with violence, the great city, and shall never be found any longer.
And the sound of harpists and musicians, and flute players and trumpeters, shall never be heard in you any longer. And any craftsmen of any craft shall never be found in you any longer, and the sound of a millstone shall never be heard in you any longer.
And the light of lamp shall never shine in you any longer, and the voice of a bridegroom and a bride shall never be heard in you any longer. For your merchants were the great ones of the earth, because by your sorcery all the nations were deceived.”
And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints and of all those having been slain on the earth.
After these things I heard something like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, crying out: “Hallelujah! The salvation and the glory and the power to our God!
For His judgments are true and righteous, because He has judged the great prostitute, who had corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and He has avenged the blood of His servants, out of her hand.”
And a second time they said: “Hallelujah! And her smoke goes up to the ages of the ages.”
And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God, the One sitting on the throne, saying: “Amen, Hallelujah!”
And a voice came forth from the throne, saying: “Praise our God, all you His servants, and those fearing Him, the small and the great!”
And I heard something like the voice of a great multitude, and like the sound of many waters, and like a sound of mighty thunders, saying: “Hallelujah! For the Lord God our Almighty has reigned.
We should rejoice and should exult and will give to Him the glory, because the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His bride has made herself ready.
And it was given to her that she should be clothed in bright, pure, fine linen.” For the fine linen is the righteousness acts of the saints.
And he says to me, “Write, ‘Blessed are those having been invited to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb.’” And he says to me, “These are the true words of God.”
And I fell before his feet to worship to him. And he says to me, “See that you not do this. I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers, holding the testimony of Jesus. Worship God! For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”
And I saw heaven having been opened, and behold, a white horse, and the One sitting upon it called Faithful and True, and in righteousness He judges and makes war.
Now His eyes are like a flame of fire, and upon His head many diadems, having a name having been written, which no one except He Himself knows,
and having been clothed with a garment having been dipped in blood. And His name is called The Word of God.
And the armies who were in heaven, having been clothed in pure, white, fine linen were following Him upon white horses.
And out of His mouth goes forth a sharp sword, so that with it He may strike down the nations; and He will shepherd them with a rod of iron. And He treads the press of the wine of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty.
And He has a name having been written upon the robe and upon His thigh: King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
And I saw one angel standing in the sun, and he cried out in loud a voice, saying to all the birds flying in mid-heaven, “Come, gather yourselves unto the great supper of God,
so that you may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of commanders, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of horses and of those sitting on them, and the flesh of all, both free and slaves, and small and great.”
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, having been gathered together to make war with the One sitting on the horse and with His army.
And the beast was captured, and with him the false prophet, the one having done the signs before him, by which he deceived those having received the mark of the beast and those worshiping its image. The two were cast living into the lake of fire burning with brimstone.
And the rest were killed with the sword of the One sitting on the horse having gone forth out of his mouth. And all the birds were filled with their flesh.
And I saw an angel descending out of heaven, holding in his hand the key of the Abyss, and a great chain.
And he seized the dragon, the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.
And he cast him into the Abyss, and shut and sealed it over him, so that he should not deceive the nations any longer, until the thousand years were completed. After these things it is necessary for him to be released for a little time.
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them, and the souls of those having been beheaded because of the testimony of Jesus and because of the word of God, and those who did not worship the beast, nor his image, and did not take the mark upon the forehead, and upon their hand. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
The rest of the dead did not live again until the thousand years shall have been completed. This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy is the one having a part in the first resurrection! Over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with Him a thousand years.
And when the thousand years shall have been completed, Satan will be released out of his prison,
and will go out to deceive the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together unto the war, of whom is the number of them like the sand of the sea.
And they marched up over the breadth of the earth and encircled the camp of the saints and the city having been beloved. But fire came down out of heaven and devoured them.
And the devil, the one deceiving them, was cast into the lake of fire and of sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet also are; and they will be tormented day and night to the ages of the ages.
And I saw a great white throne and the One sitting on it, from whose face the earth and heaven fled, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. And another book was opened, which is the one of life. And the dead were judged out of the things having been written in the books, according to their deeds.
And the sea gave up the dead who were in it; and death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them; and each of them were judged according to their works.
And death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
And if anyone was not found having been written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea is no more.
And I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, having been prepared as a bride having been adorned for her husband.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying: “Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will tabernacle with them, and they will be His peoples, and God Himself will be with them as their God.
And He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more nor mourning nor crying nor pain; they will be no more, because the former things have passed away.”
And the One sitting on the throne said, “Behold, I make all things new.” And He says, “Write this, because these words are faithful and true.”
And He said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the one thirsting I will give of the spring of the water of life freely.
The one overcoming will inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he will be My son.
But to the cowardly and unbelieving and having become abominable and murderers and the sexually immoral and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, their portion is in the lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.”
And one of the seven angels having the seven bowls being full of the seven last plagues came and spoke with me, saying, “Come here, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb.”
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and he showed me the holy city Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious stone, like a jasper stone being clear as crystal,
having a great and high wall, having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names having been inscribed which are the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel.
On the east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south three gates, and on the west three gates.
And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
And the one speaking with me had a golden measuring reed, so that he could measure the city, and its gates, and its wall.
And the city lies foursquare, and its length the same as also the width. And he measured the city with the reed at twelve thousand stadia. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.
And he measured its wall, one hundred forty-four cubits, the measure of man, that is of the angel.
And the structure of its wall was jasper, and the city pure gold, like clear glass,
the foundations of the wall of the city having been adorned with every precious stone: the first foundation jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald,
the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst.
And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; each one of the gates respectively was of one pearl, and the street of the city pure gold, transparent as glass.
And I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb.
And the city has no need of the sun, nor of the moon, that they should shine in it; for the glory of God enlightened it, and its lamp is the Lamb.
And the nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth bring their glory into it.
And its gates shall not be shut by day, for there will be no night there.
And they will bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it.
And anything defiling, and those practicing abomination and a lie, never shall enter into it; only those having been written in the Lamb’s book of life.
And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, flowing out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.
In the middle of its street and of the river, on this side and on that side, was a tree of life, producing twelve fruits, yielding its fruit according to each month; and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
And there will not be any curse any longer. And the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and His servants will serve Him.
And they will see His face, and His name will be on their foreheads.
And there will be no night there, and they have no need of the light of a lamp and of the light of the sun, because the Lord God will enlighten upon them, and they will reign to the ages of the ages.
And he said to me, “These words are faithful and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent His angel to show His servants the things that must come to pass in quickness.”
“And behold, I am coming quickly. Blessed is the one keeping the words of the prophecy of this book.”
And I, John, am the one hearing and seeing these things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel showing these things me.
And he says to me, “See that you not do this. I am your fellow servant, and with your brothers the prophets, and with those keeping the words of this book. Worship God!”
And he says to me, “Do not seal the words of the prophecy of this book; for the time is near.
The one being unrighteous, let him be unrighteous still; and he who is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he who is righteous, let him practice righteousness still; and he who is holy, let him be holy still.”
“Behold, I am coming quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give to each as is his work.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.”
Blessed are those washing their robes, that their right will be to the tree of life, and they shall enter into the city by the gates.
Outside are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the sexually immoral, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and everyone loving and practicing falsehood.
“I, Jesus, have sent My angel to testify to all of you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright morning star.”
And the Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And the one hearing, let him say, “Come!” And the one thirsting let him come; the one desiring, let him take freely the water of life.
I testify to everyone hearing the words of the prophecy of this book: If anyone should add to these things, God will add unto him the plagues having been written in this book.
And if anyone should take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city, of those having been written in this book.
The One testifying these things says, “Yes, I am coming quickly.” Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all the saints. Amen.
